The Project Gutenberg eBook of Cancer: Its Cause and Treatment, Volume 1 (of 2)

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Cancer: Its Cause and Treatment, Volume 1 (of 2)

Author: Lucius Duncan Bulkley

Release date: May 19, 2019 [eBook #59550]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Turgut Dincer and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANCER: ITS CAUSE AND TREATMENT, VOLUME 1 (OF 2) ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Turgut Dincer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                                 CANCER
                                  ITS
                          CAUSE AND TREATMENT


                                   BY
                     L. DUNCAN BULKLEY, A.M., M.D.

                            Senior Physician
              The New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, etc.

[Illustration]

                                NEW YORK
                             PAUL B. HOEBER
                                  1915




                            Copyright, 1915
                           BY PAUL B. HOEBER

                      _Published, February, 1915_


                          Printed in U. S. A.




                                   To

                             THE GOVERNORS

                                 of the

                   NEW YORK SKIN AND CANCER HOSPITAL

        whose kind appreciation of and assistance to the author
             in his clinical work in their institution have
                   done much to encourage him and to
                 promote the interest of the profession
                            in the branch of

                              DERMATOLOGY

                     this little book is inscribed




                                PREFACE


Cancer has hitherto been regarded almost wholly from its histological
and surgical aspects. The investigators and practitioners along these
lines have been innumerable, the work done prodigious, and the
literature relating thereto enormous. But relatively little attention
has been paid to the medical aspects of this most threatening malady,
although voices have been raised from time to time, with more or less
force, all joining in the same plea that the basic cause of the disease
lies in some derangement in the vital forces of the organism, as
influenced largely by diet and mode of life.

It has, therefore, seemed to the writer that it was time to stop and
look at cancer from a broader aspect, and by synthesis and deduction to
seek to understand some of the underlying causes of malignant disease;
also to see if some general principles could not be ascertained upon
which could be based an explanation of the views he had long held, and
of the practice which he had long followed in regard to the prevention
and cure of this dire malady. And as his studies progressed he was more
and more satisfied that the true solution of the cancer problem lay
along the lines indicated, although there was still very much to be
learned regarding the details and application of the principles
involved.

The lectures were prepared for and delivered to practicing physicians at
the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, in connection with the regular
Wednesday lectures on Diseases of the Skin, as I felt that I should give
them the benefit of what I felt to be of value in my own practice,
private and public.

Although holding the views here expressed for many years I have
hesitated writing strongly on the subject before, lest I should be
misunderstood or misjudged: for favorable results based solely on a
clinical diagnosis of cancer are always doubted. I have also feared lest
by advocating a dietetic and medical consideration and treatment of
cancer, which possibly might not be carried out exactly, I might really
do harm; since some might be led to neglect operative measures in proper
cases, at the proper time; and so in certain instances great injury and
injustice might be done to the patient, and the time pass in which a
surgical operation might possibly be of service.

But with my views and experience, strengthened greatly by what studies I
have been able to make in the midst of a busy professional life, I now
feel that I should do wrong in not presenting the results and
conclusions of my study and observation. And I wish also to enter my
strong protest against the course which is usually followed in regard to
cancer, both before and after operation. With a rather extended
experience during the last forty years, I have rarely if ever found a
patient with cancer who has received adequate and continuous medical
care before operation, with a view of discovering and rectifying the
cause of the morbid growth. Too often when a cancer is suspected or
discovered it is taken as a foregone conclusion that the malady is
hopeless, except as the _results of the disease_, that is the new
growth, may be removed by the knife, X-ray, radium, caustics, etc. And
after a surgical operation, as far as my observation goes, the patients
are invariably left entirely to their own resources, with the hope,
alas, too often futile, that the tumor will not regrow, but with no
attempt to so guide the life that there shall not be the same tendency
to a recurrent malignant new-formation. Against this latter course I
also raise my earnest protest.

In presenting matter from literature bearing on the subject under
discussion I am well aware that I have hardly more than touched the
surface of the deep ocean of recorded observations on cancer, but it was
the best that I could do in my busy life. I only hope that others will
take up in earnest the subjects here presented, and that this pioneer
work may lead to the building of a strong and permanent structure
regarding the true basic cause of cancer. Truth never fears proof.

In studying the subject I have been greatly assisted by the masterful
work of Roger Williams, so often referred to and quoted from; and I feel
that a candid and careful perusal of that book will be a revelation to
many. I know that some have endeavored to throw discredit upon some of
the deductions which he makes from various statistics, but in the main
they all teach a valuable lesson and are worth serious consideration, as
they are taken from reliable sources.

Realizing fully that the problem of the cause and proper treatment of
cancer is a most profound one, which master minds have long wrestled
with and which cannot be fully settled without much further study, these
lectures are presented to the profession at large in the hope that they
may be the means of helping some one threatened with or suffering from
malignant disease; and also that they may possibly stimulate others to
investigate even more diligently along the lines of the medical aspects
of cancer.

 January, 1915.
   531 Madison Avenue.




                                CONTENTS


                                                           PAGE

                               LECTURE I

         NATURE OF CANCER                                    15


                               LECTURE II

         FREQUENCY AND GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF CANCER   43


                              LECTURE III

         METABOLISM OF CANCER                                70


                               LECTURE IV

         RELATION OF DIET TO CANCER                         106


                               LECTURE V

         MEDICAL TREATMENT OF CANCER                        135


                               LECTURE VI

         CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS            170

         BIBLIOGRAPHY                                       211

         INDEX                                              221




                                 CANCER
                                  ITS
                          CAUSE AND TREATMENT




                               LECTURE I
                            NATURE OF CANCER


It may be safely said that no disease which has afflicted mankind has
received as much attention as Cancer, or concerning which there has been
as much diligent search to find out its nature and cause. Tuberculosis,
which seemed at one time to threaten even the existence of the race, has
sunk into relative significance, as we have learned its true nature and
conquered some of the causes of its ravages, and reduced its mortality
very largely. Syphilis, under various names, forms, and aspects, was
formerly much more of a menace than now, and in earlier years caused
veritable epidemics, but is now well understood and controlled. Leprosy
is less of a terror than in earlier times, since it has been definitely
shown not to be contagious. Smallpox no longer rages, and yellow fever,
and the plague, and hook worm disease have been hunted down by
scientific study and the application of proper sanitary and medical
measures. And so on in regard to many of the ills which afflict mankind.

But cancer has held its own and has even increased in frequency, with
rapid strides and bounds in some localities, until now it looms large as
a national[1] or even universal scourge; it has been estimated to cause
the death of half a million persons yearly among the civilized people of
the earth, and untold misery and suffering to many times this number.
And all this is still going on in spite of the earnest, faithful, and
intelligent labors of innumerable research workers, the sacrifice of
countless animal lives, and the expenditure of vast sums of money; and
the end, as far as relates to its prevention and cure, seems almost as
far away as ever, for many surgeons, in past and present times, have
acknowledged their inability to cope with the disease.

Much, however, has already been established by scientific research, and
still more earnest thought, observation, and endeavor should be given to
seeking most diligently for the cause of the disease, in the laboratory
as well as in practice; for there must be some cause of cancer, and also
some reason for its steady increase.

But it is never to be forgotten that, as Pope says, “the proper study of
mankind is man,” and clinical observation, with laboratory research, on
cancer as it appears in the human being, must be the ultimate base upon
which all true advance in the knowledge of the nature, treatment, and
prevention of the malady can ever rest. To effect this we must study the
human being in all relations of life, must know the constitution and
class of subjects in which the disease is most apt to manifest itself,
understand the chemico-physiologic actions going on in the system,
before and during the existence of the disease, and by a process of
synthesis and deduction understand what is wrong and endeavor to correct
it.

All this is indeed a great undertaking, and can only be accomplished by
great effort on the part of many careful and skilled observers. But I
want, in these lectures, to give you an outline of my own thought and
study for many years, and, if possible, to let you see as I do the lines
along which investigation should be directed. It is hoped, therefore,
that this and the following lectures will throw some light on the
connection of cancer with diet and mode of life, and some suggestions as
to its prevention and cure.

_Parasitism_ has been excluded: for while at different times many
observers have reported various organisms which were thought to be the
cause of malignant growths, none of these have been definitely confirmed
by others, in spite of earnest endeavor; and all experimental and
clinical evidence is against a parasitic etiology of cancer. It is
therefore seen how improper it is to speak any longer of “_the germ of
cancer_,” for, as is now widely acknowledged, there is no such germ, it
is an _ignis fatuus_ which has been chased in vain.

The _contagiousness_ of cancer has also been excluded, certainly in the
sense in which this term is applied to other affections. For while in
some animals inoculation experiments have resulted in the transmission
of certain tumors, little has been determined except that such tumor
material when transplanted can, in some unknown manner, multiply its
cells indefinitely and form a focus of malignant disease, with
disastrous effects on adjoining tissue. The same occurs in metastasis in
cancer patients. But this does not at all explain the true basic nature
of cancer, nor its development in those who have had no connection with
other patients so afflicted. On the other hand the instances of
suggested or supposed human transmission of cancer from one individual
to another are so remarkably few, and so exceedingly doubtful, that a
recent author, Janeway, states that “no well-authenticated cases of the
transfer of a malignant tumor from one human being to another exist.” It
has been found impossible to inoculate human cancer into rats, mice, and
apes, nor can animal tumors be inoculated into animals of a different
species.

_Heredity_ has been advanced as a cause, but statistics fail to verify
this in any degree whatever. While certain instances have been brought
forward in which heredity seemed evident, the study of large numbers of
those afflicted with cancer, in connection with others free from the
disease, has shown almost the same proportion of antecedents with cancer
in both classes of persons; although some recent evidence seems to show
that there is some tendency in different families for different organs.
Experimental studies have, it is true, seemed to demonstrate that tumors
occur apparently along hereditary lines in some animals in regard to
certain organs; but in these instances it is to be remembered that the
animals were kept in captivity, and all fed alike, conditions which have
been found to cause the development of malignant disease in wild animals
when confined in Zoölogical Gardens.

In former years _malaria_ was believed to have an influence in the
production of cancer, and some investigators have thought to trace the
prevalence of the disease to _telluric influences_, showing a
preponderance of cases along certain water courses, or in certain
streets or houses; but no definite proof of such connection has ever
been established, and this theory is dismissed by the best authorities.
_Syphilis_, in its latent effects, has also been claimed as an element
in the causation of cancer, and undoubtedly the disease may develop, in
suitable persons, upon old syphilitic lesions, especially about the
mouth, anus, and genital region: but no one well informed in regard to
cancer would regard syphilis as the real cause of the disease. All these
and other etiological propositions are no longer considered to be
tenable, and the very multiplicity of suggested causes shows that we are
yet very far from the true etiology of cancer.

_Age_ undoubtedly has a powerful influence in the development of cancer,
the vast majority of cases occurring after the age of forty or fifty.
But, again, this does not at all explain the true nature of the disease,
for only a certain proportion of elderly people are so afflicted, and
malignant tumors have been observed in those of all ages, and even in
young children. The degeneration of tissue belonging to advancing years
undoubtedly renders it more susceptible to malignant disease, but this
does not explain why one person is affected and not another, nor why the
tissues in one locality or another take on this morbid action.

More recent scientific study has attempted to show that cancer
originates from what are called “_embryonic rests_,” or pre-natal,
wrongly placed, tissue elements, which at some time or other take on
morbid action and develop into what we know as the various forms of
cancer. Williams says, “From a biological standpoint tumor formation
must be regarded as a phenomenon of the same order as reproduction in
general: that is to say, as a special form of overgrowth of the
individual.” But here again it is necessary to determine what causes
them at certain times and in certain places to thus proliferate and form
new tissue, which then becomes malignant and may proceed to destroy all
contiguous tissues, and even to cause death.

_Traumatism_ has been claimed by many as the cause which determines the
activity of the misplaced cells, and starts them on their disastrous or
rampant course: the various percentages of the cases in which it was
believed that traumatism started up the malignant process has varied
greatly with different observers, even up to 50 per cent, or more. But
it is far from proven that this is always the case, nor does local
injury in any way explain the persistency with which malignant disease,
when once started, pursues its destructive and even fatal career; nor
can traumatism account for the great tendency to recurrence constantly
observed, either in the former site or at some distant focus, through
the agency of the lymphatic or vascular system. For of multitudinous
traumatisms, even in cancer subjects, how few ever develop into
malignant disease!

It would seem, therefore, that for the development of the local
manifestation of cancer (the tumor or new growth) three elements are
requisite, namely: 1. A predisposition or suitable blood condition. 2. A
local stimulation or irritation of the part affected, _upon_, 3. The
site of an “embryonic rest.”

On the basis of the embryonic theory surgeons have of late most
earnestly advocated the very early and complete removal of malignant
lesions, including those of suspected malignancy, and even also the
removal of many innocent lesions which are observed occasionally to lead
to cancerous formation; and unless a better plan can be determined this
cannot be urged too strongly in proper cases.

But while early operation has improved surgical statistics, it has not
contributed to our real knowledge of the basic cause of cancer, nor has
it taught us why those lesions or “embryonic rests” will remain
quiescent for years, or prove harmless in some individuals, while in
others they become most formidable agents of destruction. For it is now
recognized that these wrongly placed tissue elements are very common
anatomical or histological accidents, indeed it is claimed that they
occur and exist in every individual: and the removal of isolated
“embryonic rests” which have developed into cancer, does not by any
means prevent the transformation of other similarly misplaced cells into
malignant disease, as the frequent recurrence of cancer after operation
demonstrates.

The same is true of the many and various forms of treatment other than
surgical excision, such as deep acting caustics, and even the X-ray and
radium, which like surgery, only remove the focus of possible systemic
infection, and do not affect the basic cause of the complaint: this
latter is being shown more and more, by scientific investigation and
observation, to be associated with metabolic or chemico-physiological
changes in the system, and evidence is accumulating that it is dependent
upon them.

All this leads thoughtful persons to inquire if there is not some
deeper, fundamental cause lying back of the trouble, which should be
reached and rectified by medical skill and acumen, something to do with
the life or diet of a person which renders the tissues liable to take on
malignant disease. So that a recent surgical writer on cancer states
that “all study, whether clinical, pathological, or experimental, points
to the fact that there is some underlying, hidden cause which leads to
that aberration in the action of tissue cells which we call cancer,” ...
a cause “residing in only the cells themselves or in some abnormal
chemical constitution of the plasma bathing the cells, or in both of
these possibilities acting together.”

_Occupation_ has been questioned, but with most unsatisfactory results,
for in some statistics which have been gathered cancer has been observed
in those following all possible pursuits: and while laborers stood first
on the list, clergymen stood fourth, while carters, threshers, and
guides, who would be exposed to local injury, were at the bottom of a
long list. It has been found, however, to be more frequent in trades or
occupations in which the individual is most subject to the habitual
abuse of alcoholics, as in bartenders, printers, etc.

We see, then, that thus far no satisfactory cause has been established
for the occurrence of cancer, much less for the steady and great
increase of the disease of late years. And as far as can be learned, no
measures are recognized, or at least generally adopted, to prevent its
occurrence or recurrence; although, as already stated, modern surgery
has seemed to improve the statistics in regard to its mortality in
certain forms or locations, and the X-ray and radium have certainly also
been able to remove, perhaps temporarily, some of the products of the
disease.

We come then to the question, what is the real nature of cancer? Alas,
all scientific, experimental, and clinical investigations have failed to
solve the problem, except that all “evidence points to the conclusion
that cancer is to be considered as a pathological disturbance of the
normal cell life,” from some unknown cause. A curious suggestion has
been made by Schmidt, who found that of 241 cases of cancer of the
chylopoietic system, 180 had never had any infectious disease of
childhood, and 99 went through life without any infection of any kind;
the figures point to the existence of a cancer diathesis—one which is
resistent to germs.

It would carry us too far from the practical side of our subject, even
if we were at all able, to present or analyze the vast number of
contributions which have been made to the pathological histology of
cancer, and the changes which take place in the transformation of normal
cells into those of malignant character: the amount of microscopic work
which has been done along this line can hardly be imagined, and the
literature relating to it is enormous.

Ewing, accepting the definition that the cancer process is “atypical and
destructive proliferation of epithelium,” quotes Ribert as saying that
“no one has ever seen the beginnings of mammary cancer”: but he does not
bring us much nearer to the solution of the cancer problem than we were
before. Bainbridge rejects all possibility of a blood condition, and
finds the only solution of it in the early removal of everything which
is thought to lead to cancer, even the simplest benign new formations,
but Ewing states that “in some cases carcinoma has developed after
excision of wholly benign fibro-adenoma”: and the immense number of
cases of recurrent cancer after operations shows that we must look
further than surgery if we wish to stay the progress of this formidable
disease.

It would be useless to attempt to present the many theories which have
been advanced relating to cellular metaplasia, or even to detail all the
more or less accepted views in regard to the manner in which normal
cells change and degenerate into those of malignant character: but some
of the principal facts may be of service in understanding somewhat of
the mode of development of malignant tissue from that which has been
normal.

The statement of Virchow, “Omnis cellula e cellula,” that is, “where a
cell arises there a cell must have previously existed, just as an animal
can spring only from an animal and a plant from a plant,” forms the
basis of all study on the genesis of cancer and all tumor formation;
karyokinesis, or indirect nuclear or cell division, is at the bottom of
all growth, both normal and malignant, and the two classes of growth
differ only in their methods and activity. In healthy tissues cell
proliferation and destruction proceed in an orderly manner, forming
homologous structures, as when the hair and nails are constantly
produced from newly formed cells at the root, and the result of this new
growth is removed mechanically when the hair and nails are cut from time
to time, or the hairs fall out. In the case of the skin the epidermal
layers are pushed forward and finally exfoliated as useless epithelial
débris.

With the cells composing other, or internal structures, however, the
process is different. For here each normal cell reproduces others of
homologous structure, and the different parts of the system are thus
kept in active service through anabolism, by means of which new cells
are formed with renewed vitality, and the older, or effete cells are
removed by catabolism; the elements of which they are composed are thus
split up into their component parts, and carried off by the blood or
lymph stream, and are then either discharged as effete substances or
reutilized in the system, along physiological lines. Wakefield has
pretty clearly shown that the developing cancer cell is the product of
sub-catabolism, or a sub-oxygenation, induced by hyperacidity or oxidase
deficiency in the surrounding medium of the blood plasma.

A great deal of thought, study, and speculation have been given in
regard to the behavior of the cells themselves, and strong arguments are
adduced for a local cell pathology, that is, regarding the cells as
“autonomous beings, possessed of morphological and physiological
independence.” But on the other hand we must recognize some restraining
influence which continually causes the great mass of cells to reproduce
those of homologous structure, in an orderly manner, and only very
rarely some of them to break loose and form tumors, which may then
become malignant and even destroy life. How this restraining influence
is modified or withdrawn is, of course, a part of the problem of cancer.
Those who maintain their autogenous character lay great stress upon the
polarity of cells, and the relation of the centrosome to the nucleus,
indicating a change in the polar axis in cells about to be
cancer-genetic, as does Ewing in his recent classical study of
pre-cancerous lesions. But whatever changes are observed microscopically
we must recognize that the cells themselves must be influenced
ultimately by that mysterious force which we call life, which ends with
its extinction from the body as a whole, and which is ultimately related
to nerve action. We must also recognize that the cells everywhere depend
for their life and activity upon the plasma in which they are bathed and
from whence they draw their sustenance; and this plasma is renewed day
by day from the food and drink taken.

Students of cancer are more and more recognizing and acknowledging that
“all these phenomena, apparently so different, are merely protean
manifestations of one common process which underlies and is the cause of
them all, to wit, cell growth and proliferation. The particular outcome
of the process in any given case is due to the influence of the
conditions of nutrition—understanding by this term the whole of the
material changes wrought in the organism through its relation with the
surrounding world. This being so it is easy to understand how, under
favorable conditions, certain cells may take on independent action,
growing and multiplying without regard to the requirements of adjacent
tissues and of the organism as a whole.”

There seems to be some reason to support the view advocated by Williams,
that tumor formation and growth are but forms of agamogenesis, or
non-sexual reproduction of cells, distinctly related to the decline in
growth of the body in general. Hence while the forces of growth,
development, and reproduction are in greatest activity the tendency to
this disease is relatively small: but when growth declines and nutrition
is relatively low the cells undergo gemmation, owing to perverted
nutriment, and thus hyperplasia and not inflammation is the starting
point of every neoplasm.

Experimental work has time and again demonstrated that cell growth,
either good or bad, is modified in no uncertain way by the character of
the nutrition furnished. Cancer has repeatedly been observed to
disappear spontaneously, as such cases are on record by careful and
competent medical men: in certain of these instances it has occurred in
connection with a radical change in the mode of life and diet, but in
the majority of instances there is no record of the special cause of its
disappearance. The lesson to be learned from this is that there are
conditions of the system which are antagonistic to the abnormal
proliferation of cell tissue, even when it has begun to take place, as
we must believe that there are other conditions of the system which
favor such diseased action of aberrant cells.

An interesting confirmation of this is attributed to Ehrlich, but I
cannot find the original reference. He “has shown that mice living upon
a rice diet cannot be inoculated with cancer, while mice living on a
meat diet can be readily inoculated, cancerous tumors developing quickly
and continuing to grow until the animal dies. Ehrlich also found that
when mice with cancerous tumors, the result of inoculation, were placed
upon a rice diet, the tumors ceased to grow, and in many cases
degenerated and disappeared.” Valuable corroboration of this has been
given by Sweet, Corson, White, and Saxon. They made a series of
experiments in regard to the “influence of certain diets upon the growth
of experimental tumors,” all with the same results. Of fifty white mice,
25 fed on glutenin and gliadin, and 25 on normal diet, 23 of the 25 on
normal diet acquired tumors, against only 4 in the 25 on the glutenin
and gliadin. This was repeated on 50 males, with the result of 18 in 25
against 3 in 25: and in a third series, of 50 females, the figures were
15 in 25 against 7 in 25. Thus, they found that 75 per cent. of 75 mice
developed experimentally inoculated tumors when under normal diet, while
only 19 per cent. of other 75 mice developed such tumors when under a
diet of glutenin and gliadin, that is, vegetable proteins; moreover, the
tumors in the latter were in 30 days hardly larger than those in the
former in 10 days. Rous has recently shown that large growths of certain
transplanted rat and mouse tumors are checked in their development by
underfeeding the host on a special diet.

The chemistry of cancer has been studied in most varied directions, and
the literature relating thereto is very voluminous and can be hardly
more than alluded to here. It is unfortunate, however, that most of the
researches have been made in connection with patients who have advanced
cancer, and very commonly with the disease affecting internal organs,
which of itself interferes very greatly with their function, and so
causes many of the perturbations of metabolism observed. What is needed
are researches in regard to the metabolism of patients before the
development of the disease, or in its earlier stages, before it has
exerted its injurious effects on the system, in order to learn of the
causes which lead up to and induce the wrong action of the cellular
elements, whose invasion and malignant action subsequently become so
serious.

It is quite impossible in these lectures to enter at all fully upon the
various bio-chemical studies which have been carried on in regard to
cancer, but brief mention will be shortly made of some of the salient
points. Not only has the structure of carcinomatous tissue been examined
chemically, but the blood and urine have been submitted to most
painstaking investigation, and metabolism in general has been studied in
almost all possible directions, in the search for the cause of cancer;
and yet, as Beebe says, “no phase of metabolism has been described in
cancer which does not have a counterpart in non-cancerous conditions.”
But, as previously mentioned, all these observations and studies have
been largely made upon advanced cancer cases, when the system has
already felt the unsettling and depressing effect of what is probably an
injurious secretion from the deranged and actively proliferating cells
of the cancerous mass. In a later lecture we will consider some of these
matters in so far as they have relation to the dietetic and medical
treatment of cancer.

The essence of our study thus far has been, that in every instance what
is called malignant disease is but an aberrant action of originally
normal body cells. That, as normal cells find their nutriment in the
circulating plasma, so some pathological change in this latter causes
them to take on abnormal action, and they no longer develop homologous
cells, capable of forming normal tissue, but heterologous elements which
have a natural tendency to disintegrate or break down, and exert a
destructive influence on adjoining cells of any kind; and in this
process they secrete a hormone which is prejudicial to the system and
tends to destroy life. In later lectures we shall endeavor to understand
this more perfectly, and consider some of the elements in life which
tend towards the production and arrest of cancer.




                               LECTURE II
           FREQUENCY AND GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF CANCER


Cancer in man exists all over the globe, but in different degrees of
frequency, according to varying conditions of life, as we shall
presently see. Malignant growths occur also in animals and fishes,
though also with greatly varying frequency under different conditions;
but there are few real tumors in reptiles or amphibians. Tumors are also
occasionally found in vegetable organisms, presenting increased growth
and proliferation of cells, arising from adventitious, or abnormally
evolving buds, as also from parasitic and other external irritants.
While these vegetable tumors are very interesting and in a measure
instructive, in regard to the peculiarities of cell growth which they
exhibit, they bear, of course, no relation to cancer in the animal
kingdom, although some have endeavored to argue otherwise. There is,
however, a certain suggestion of analogy to be found in the observation
made by one writer, that “the origin of buds, as well as their
subsequent development, is chiefly determined by the conditions of
nutrition. Wherever there is an excess of nutritive material, capable of
being utilized for growth by the cells of the part, there buds may
arise”; we shall see later that the same thought applies to cancer in
man and animals, when we come to the consideration of the relation of
overindulgence along certain lines of eating and drinking to cancer.

Cancer has well been styled a disease of modern civilization, like
tuberculosis, although of quite a different nature. Interesting studies
have been made in regard to the increased death rate from the former in
England, coincident with a diminished mortality of the latter, in
accordance with nutritional changes which have taken place in certain
populations: and in the first lecture I mentioned that in the United
States the mortality from tuberculosis had fallen 25 per cent. between
1900 and 1912 while, as we shall see later, the mortality from cancer
has certainly risen.

Williams, who quotes very largely from the accurate statistics which
have long been carefully recorded in England, says that “while tubercle
has declined with great rapidity, cancer has increased at a still faster
rate, and these inversely related changes are still in active progress.
In illustration of these remarks it may be mentioned that during the
last half of the nineteenth century, the cancer mortality for England
tripled: while, during the same period the tubercle death rate declined
to the extent of nearly one-half. Unless some great change in the
national habits takes place, of which there is at the present no well
marked indication, cancer will ere long claim more victims than
phthisis, as is already the case in many localities—e. g., Hampstead,
Clifton, Bath, etc.” He further says, “I regard this decline in the
presence of tuberculous diseases as the direct outcome of the better
food and improved hygienic conditions, for which we are indebted to our
increased national prosperity: and I shall endeavor to show that
conditions of this kind, by their action in another direction, are also
mainly responsible for the augmented cancer mortality.” We shall see
later that cancer has asserted itself where modern civilization has
augmented the opportunities of overindulgence along many lines of eating
and drinking: for while advancing scientific knowledge has undoubtedly
diminished mortality in general, and has added to the average length of
life, the various factors included in our modern mode of living have
also with certainty increased morbidity along such lines as neurotic and
vascular disorders, tumors, etc.

All statistics from various localities show that cancer has certainly
increased in frequency very greatly of late years, and though some have
attempted to claim that this increase is only apparent, and is due to
greater accuracy of diagnosis, and the prolonging of more lives to an
age when cancer is more common, there is no doubt in the minds of those
who have studied the figures that the increase is certainly very real;
and unless there be found some way to check its production, the death
rate at the end of the century will be appalling.

It is quite impossible here even to give a comprehensive idea of the
immense amount of work which has been given to the study of the
statistics of cancer in various parts of the world, as collected in the
remarkable works of Roger Williams and Jacob Wolff, but brief mention
must be made of some of the items observed and recorded in order to
properly understand our subject. Williams in particular has analyzed the
recorded facts in an interesting and convincing manner, and shown again
and again in connection with the figures from different countries,
sections, and cities, that the occurrence of cancer bears a striking
relation to the condition of the people in reference to their material
prosperity; namely, that the well-to-do, who can overindulge in many
ways are vastly more subject to cancer than those in the poorer walks of
life; also that aborigines in the wilder parts of the world are either
almost exempt from cancer, or suffer from it to a very much less degree
than civilized foreigners who come to their lands. This is also shown in
a very striking manner by Wolff, and I present here a table which he
gives in regard to the progress of cancer in a single country,
Australia, among the native born and foreigners.

           OF 100,000 LIVING THERE DIE OF CANCER IN AUSTRALIA

    _Year_      _Number of   _Native Born_   _English_       _Other
               Inhabitants_                              Nationalities_
          1851       403,889                        28   14
          1861     1,153,973           5.6          30.5 19
          1871     1,168,377           9.7          56.7 25
          1881     2,252,167          16.8          72.9 32.6
          1891     3,183,237          19.8         119.8 45.9
          1901     3,771,715          22.6         203.1 57.3

He remarks, “We see from this comparison in what a great degree the
death rate from cancer has increased in foreigners as compared to the
native born, in whom the disease has remained about stationary, when the
increase in population is considered.” Another writer remarks that when
native Australians mingle with foreigners as servants or employés, and
adopt their diet and customs, cancer occurs more frequently in them.
Much the same has been reported in regard to other peoples and
nationalities, and later we will consider the influences of urban life
on the production of cancer.

In New Zealand, according to Hislop and Fenwick, where the general death
rate is the lowest in the world, cancer is on the increase, as
civilization advances. In the great majority of cases the alimentary
canal is the seat of invasion, even in women: all the patients studied
were hearty eaters, taking also very much strong tea many times daily.

The Polynesians and Melanesians seem to be peculiarly exempt from
cancer. Sir William McGregor, although he had operated several times on
whites in the Fiji Islands, never remembers operating on a Polynesian or
Melanesian, who are practically vegetarians. He never saw a case in
British Guinea in 9½ years, and then saw an encephaloid cancer of the
tibia in a Papuan, who for 7 or 8 years had lived practically a European
life, eating canned Australian meat daily.

In regard to Africa, Williams quotes Dr. Madden of Cairo, who says, “The
consensus of opinion among medical men in Egypt is, that cancer is never
found, either in male or female, among the black races of that country.
These include the Berberines and the Sudanese, who are all Mussulmans,
and live almost entirely upon vegetable diet.” Of 19,529 deaths among
natives of Cairo during 1891, only 19 were due to cancer (females 10,
males 9) or 1 in 1028. In England during the same year the proportion of
cancer deaths to total deaths was 1 in 29. In the Islands of Lagos, on
the West Coast of Africa, Dr. Johnson, in 14 years’ practice there saw 5
cases of cancer in natives all of whom lived as Europeans. In southern
Africa, “among the Boers and Europeans, who are large flesh eaters,
malignant tumors are common: but among the natives, who are mainly
vegetarians, these tumors are so rare as to be almost unknown.”

Renner reports interestingly in regard to cancer among the descendants
of liberated Africans or Creoles, in Sierra Leone, Africa. During 30
years, from 1870 to 1900, there were but 20 cases recorded as malignant
disease among 22,453 admitted to the Colonial Hospital: in the next ten
years there were 26 among a total of 10,163, a slow but steady gain in
cancer incidence, with the advancing influence of the white man. He says
that while the aborigines eat no meat, the “Creoles” eat much meat; the
teeth of the latter are beginning to decay, like those of the whites,
which is attributed to the sweets introduced by the latter. Every case
of cancer recorded has been in a Creole, living like a European, and not
a single case among the aborigines.

Much the same freedom from cancer has been noted in regard to negroes
when first brought to the United States in slavery, when their food and
mode of life was simple: but since emancipation and in proportion as
they have mingled with whites and eaten their food, with their own
natural tendency to gluttony and laziness, cancer has increased among
them, although their death rate from malignant disease is still much
less than that of whites.

In India all writers agree that cancer is rare among the inhabitants of
warmer country districts, where they live largely on rice or millet,
with a little milk and butter, and vegetables: they eat meat rarely, the
immense majority of the people live a rural life, depending upon
agriculture for their sustenance.

Investigations of late years, however, might seem to indicate that
cancer is more prevalent in India than previously supposed, but its
incidence still bears no real relation to that in many other countries,
and an analysis of some recent reports explains in an interesting and
curious manner the reasons for the diversity of opinion as to the actual
frequency of the disease.

Thus, Benratt collected a total of 1700 cases only from 5 years’
statistics of 15 Mission Hospitals and 34 Government Hospitals,
representing, of course, many million inhabitants, whereas in New York
City, according to the weekly Bulletin of the Board of Health, there
were 2193 deaths from cancer in the last six months, a striking
illustration of the rarity of cancer in India. Moreover of these 1700
cases, over 1200 were about the mouth, a very large share of these
arising from the very common habit of chewing betel, which contains also
much calcium, which latter is one of the salts incriminated in the
causation of cancer. Sandwith attempts to show that cancer is prevalent
in India, but refers to only 2000 cases reported in the hospitals there,
in three years, also among many millions of people, and he refers
likewise to the betel chewing cancer, and the “kangri burn” on the
abdomen of men, from the charcoal furnace worn for warmth: these
peculiar local disorders vitiate any deductions which could be drawn
from such statistics.

In China, according to a recent writer, “cancer is comparatively
uncommon in those parts where the bulk of the people live on an almost
exclusively vegetarian diet, being too poor to purchase any of the
various flesh foods, which are there used for culinary purposes.” But in
places where cancer is said to be more prevalent, the reporter adds,
“All Chinamen there eat fish and pork at morning and evening meals:
fowls and ducks are always on the table of all but the most humble of
the coolie class.”

In regard to the occurrence of cancer in the Far East, however, some of
the modern investigators, such as Bashford, have endeavored to overturn
the generally accepted view as to its infrequency, but I do not feel
that the evidence presented can at all weigh against the unprejudiced
opinion of most capable medical men who have long lived and practiced in
those regions, some of whom as medical missionaries have had most
intimate contact and acquaintance with the natives. Only very recently a
medical missionary, who has long been connected with the medical college
and hospital in Beirut, Syria, told me that cancer was practically
unknown among the thousands of patients who flock there from all over
the Near East, he adding that they were all largely vegetarians.

During a rather extensive trip through the Far East I was unable to see
or even hear of any cancer, although I met a large number of medical
men, and made diligent inquiry regarding the same. As I wished to verify
my views in regard to the rarity of the occurrence of cancer among those
who lived on rice or other vegetarian diet, I visited very many civil,
military, and mission hospitals, with a total of many thousands of
patients, and ministering to many millions of population; in Japan,
Korea, China, the Philippines, India, Siam, and Egypt, I met the same
response, that cancer was rarely seen among those vegetarian natives.

Brazil is credited with having the lowest cancer record of any portion
of the western hemisphere, especially among the natives in the
Equatorial regions, while in the Argentine Republic, where meat is known
to be largely consumed, cancer is fairly common. From many parts of the
world there come reports of the relative infrequency or even absence of
cancer among simple living natives, one writer in regard to the West
Indies stating “Even those cases which I have witnessed in this class of
people have been among the better orders of them, whose habits of living
assimilated to those of Europeans.”

England and Wales present the most satisfactory field for the study of
the progress of cancer, as the national vital statistics have been well
kept since 1840; even at that time under the able direction of William
Farr they had already acquired a well-deserved reputation for
reliability, as Williams remarks, from whom I shall freely quote.

In that year, 1840, there died of malignant disease in England and Wales
1 in 5,646 of the total population, 1 in 129 of the total mortality, or
117 per million living. In 1905, the deaths, due to this cause were 1 in
1,131 of the total population, 1 in 17 of the total mortality, or 885
per million living: thus, while the population had only a little more
than doubled, the cancer death rate per million living had increased
five fold. Dr. Williams answers by figures and tables the several
objections which have been raised in regard to the actual increased
mortality from cancer, as it has been repeatedly claimed that the
increase is only apparent and not real; thus it has been asserted that
it is due—1. To mere increase of population: 2. To the average age of
the population having advanced: and 3. To improved diagnosis and more
careful death certification. Time does not admit a full presentation of
his statistical refutation of these claims, to which he devotes some
pages very convincingly, but it can be safely accepted that for some as
yet unknown reason, cancer has made strides in England which are truly
alarming.

Williams has also made some most interesting studies in regard to the
increase of cancer in connection with changed conditions of life, and
from his analysis of statistics, he very clearly shows that the spread
of the disease has closely followed urbanization, and the rapid increase
in material prosperity of recent years: in England where 80 per cent. of
the population are now town dwellers, this tendency to collect in cities
and towns has gone farther than in any other community. He recognizes
that any far-reaching, environmental change of some duration is probably
potent in disturbing the stability of the constituents of living bodies,
and the sudden change from poverty to riches and plenty is conducive to
the development of cancer: allusion has already been made to the inverse
relation of deaths from cancer and tuberculosis, the latter diminishing
with improved material conditions, while the former increases as wealth
and indolence increase.

He shows this by statistics from various localities, and by data from
towns in different countries he makes it pretty clear that “Cancer
mortality is lowest where the conditions of life are hardest, the
surroundings the most squalid, the density of population greatest, where
the tubercle mortality is highest, the general and infantile mortality
greatest, and where sanitation is least perfect—in short, among the poor
of the industrial class in our great towns: whereas among the wealthy
and well-to-do, where the standard of health is at its best and life is
easiest, and where all the conditions of life are just the reverse of
the foregoing, there the cancer mortality is highest.”

While this is a pretty strong statement and many exceptions could
undoubtedly be found, careful investigation will show it to be true in
the main; for it must be remembered that even among the poorer classes
gluttony, especially in regard to proteids, is not at all uncommon, and
indolence, with impeded metabolism, is not at all unusual. Dr. Latham
found that the mortality from cancer in England, from 1881‒1890, was
more than twice as great among well-to-do men having no specific
occupation, as among occupied males in general, the respective mortality
ratios being 96 for the former and only 44 for the latter. Sir William
Banks confirms the steady increase in cancer very strongly, which he
attributes to richer and more abundant food, of which males eat more
than females, and consequently cancer is increasing proportionately more
among men, as all statistics show.

Switzerland is reported to have the highest death rate from cancer of
any country, it having augmented from 114 per 100,000 living in 1889, to
132 in 1898. There again the cancer mortality varies greatly in the
different sections or cantons: thus, in wealthy Lucerne it is 204 per
100,000 living, and only 36 in poverty stricken Valais. In the city of
Geneva it is 177 per 100,000 living.

Denmark, next to Switzerland, is reputed to have the highest cancer
death rate of any country in Europe, viz.: 130 per 100,000 living in
1900. But here the statistics are only from the towns, which comprise
but a quarter of the whole population: the per capita wealth is said to
be higher there than any other country in Europe except France.

France shows a high cancer mortality, with a constantly increasing death
rate; and, next to England, France is the richest country in Europe, and
wealth is much more widely diffused: the French workers own nearly 8
times, per capita, more than those in England. In Paris the cancer death
rate has increased as follows, for each 100,000 living, in 1865, 84; in
1870, 91; in 1880, 94; in 1890, 108; in 1900, 120.

Italy, a comparatively poor country, shows a low cancer mortality, but
even here it is increasing from 20 per 100,000 living in 1880, to 52 in
1899, and 58 in 1905. The consumption of meat is there the smallest in
any European nation, namely 23 pounds per capita in 1895. In the chief
towns the rate of death from cancer is high: thus for each 100,000
living, in Florence 137, Ravenna 120, Venice 103, Milan 101, and Rome
77.

Time does not permit a wider survey of the field of distribution of
cancer, as presented so remarkably from official statistics by Williams,
and Wolff; but in connection with the high percentages of deaths above
quoted among the richer classes it may be interesting to mention some of
the lowest records. Thus, in the poor country of Kerry, Ireland, it was
27 per 100,000 living, in the province of Dalmaltia 19, in the Shetland
Islands 16, in Servia 8 (from 1895 to 1904), and in Ceylon in 1903 the
mortality from cancer was about 6 for each 100,000 living.

The United States, unfortunately, has not kept the vital statistics of
the country in years past with anything like the fullness and accuracy
which has obtained in England, nor even at the present time is it
possible to learn definitely the frequency and increase of cancer in
every locality. But all the statistics which have been gathered show
unequivocally that the disease has steadily increased in a manner which
is alarming. Analyzing the recorded deaths from cancer in thirty-one
cities, and the percentage of increase in four years, one writer
estimates that, if the same increase is continued, by the end of the
century there will be a death rate, approximately, of 1000 in every
100,000 inhabitants, or one in every hundred.

In a recent Bulletin of the Board of Health of New York City the
following statements are made in regard to the mortality from cancer in
1913: “The statistics of our seven largest cities recently tabulated,
show that the cancer death rate was the highest on record. For New York
City the rate was 82 per 100,000 of the population, against an average
of 79, for the last five years: for Boston 118 against an average of
110: for Pittsburgh 79, against an average of 70: for Baltimore 105,
against an average of 94: for Chicago 86, against an average of 81: for
Philadelphia 95, against an average of 88: for St. Louis 95, against an
average of 85.” This average increase of almost 8 per cent. of deaths
from cancer in the combined population of these seven cities, during the
last five years is certainly an alarming fact, and cannot be explained
on the ground of greater accuracy of diagnosis: for it is not to be
presumed that there has been such great improvement along diagnostic
lines during the single year 1913.

It is difficult to state the exact prevalence of cancer in the entire
United States, as the “registration areas” include only about two-thirds
of the total population: much can be learned, however, from the annual
volumes published since 1900. According to these Mortality Statistics of
the United States, the deaths from cancer and other malignant tumors per
100,000 population were as follows: in 1900, 63, in 1904, 70.2, in 1909,
73.8; and in 1912 there were 46,531 deaths from cancer, or 77 per
100,000 population, an increase in the death rate from this disease of
almost 25 per cent. since 1900; while, as before stated the tuberculosis
mortality had fallen a little over 25 per cent. in the same period.

As in other countries, which might also be expected from the statements
already made, the disease varies in frequency in different localities
and communities. Thus, cancer is stated to be much more prevalent in the
northern than in the southern states, and as already stated, the negroes
are much less subject to the disease than whites, especially when they
are living their own natural home life; but when they come to the
cities, as waiters, etc., in hotels, their cancer death rate increases.
But even in New York City in 1912 the deaths from cancer in negroes was
1 in 32.2 total deaths, against 1 in 17.7 in whites; the mass of negroes
here, of course, live plainly and work hard. The North American Indians
also are believed to be almost exempt from cancer in their primitive
savage condition, but as they have come under the influence of
civilization they are more affected. It has also been noted by several
observers that immigrants and their descendants present a very much
higher mortality from malignant diseases than prevails in their native
countries; from these and other considerations Williams suggests that
abrupt change of environment may also be a factor in the causation of
this disease.

We have thus seen while cancer is very widely distributed over the globe
it is present in varying degrees of severity in different localities,
and careful analysis shows that the disease affects different classes of
persons with unlike severity. All these statistical studies and
observations serve to confirm the statement made earlier that cancer is
a disease of so-called civilization, and that it has increased in
proportion as human beings have come under the influence of wealth, and
consequent luxury and overindulgence, with bodily inactivity; all these
elements lead to a disturbed metabolism, which as we shall see later,
is, at least, a contributing cause to the deviation from normal of some
of the cellular elements of the body. It also appears that some of these
metabolic shortcomings have to do with a disturbed nitrogenous balance,
which is due to the constantly increased consumption of meat. In 1909
the meat consumption in the United States had reached the high figure of
172 pounds per capita, as I learned recently from Washington, a far
greater amount than in England, 130 pounds, as already stated; and with
this steady increase in the use of nitrogenous food cancer has also
increased by leaps and bounds in both countries.




                              LECTURE III
                          METABOLISM OF CANCER


In the first lecture we saw that cancer was an alteration of the normal
cells of the body, whereby they take on a malignant action and continue
to do so, destroying contiguous tissues and leading to a lowered
vitality, with an apparent poisoning of the system, which finally causes
death. As the cells of various organs furnish different secretions,
which in health contribute to proper metabolism, resulting in growth or
maintenance of the tissues, so these disordered cells are believed to
secrete a toxic substance, or malignant hormone, which has a prejudicial
action on the body, and hæmolytic action on the blood, as has been
brought out pretty clearly by Troisier and others.

We saw that as yet the definite cause had not been determined, why at
some period certain cells take on the action which we call cancer, nor
why they persist in their destructive course. Long continued and
abundant laboratory and clinical research have about decided certain
questions negatively in regard to its etiology, so that in a measure the
field is cleared for the study of some of the possible basic causes of
the disease in question. Thus, all are pretty well agreed that cancer is
_not_ contagious or infectious, that it is _not_ caused by a
micro-organism or parasite, that it is _not_ wholly due to local injury,
that it does _not_ appertain to any particular occupation, that it is
_not_ hereditary to any great degree, that it does _not_ especially
belong to or affect any particular sex, race or class of persons, _nor_
is it confined to any location or section of the earth, and that it is
_not_ wholly a disease of older age.

We saw further that there appeared to be good evidence that certain
misplaced “embryonal rests” were the original starting points of
diseased cell action, but as these are now known to exist in every one
from birth, this offers no real explanation of the occurrence of the
disease at different times in life. It is, of course, quite possible
that local injury of one kind or another may be the exciting cause which
determines that a cell or group of cells shall revert to its original
reproductive activity, as Williams contends that the process is one of
agamogenesis, dependent upon excessive and faulty nutrition. The
question as to the relation of uricacidæmia, or lithæmia, to cancer has
never been fully studied, and it is worth considering whether, as in
gout and rheumatism, to which cancer is often associated and perhaps
closely allied, the exciting cause may not be the lodgment somewhere of
uratic deposit, which is further excited and fed by effete or
imperfectly oxidized nitrogenous elements; for later we shall see that
perverted metabolism, largely of proteid elements, is closely associated
with cancer.

We noted also that some attributed cancer to independent cell action,
relating to the polarity of cells, etc.; but it is inconceivable that a
cell or cells can idiopathically start out on a rampant course and
pursue it with increasing severity, even until death results, without,
at least, some definite pre-disposing cause, even though diligent and
earnest work has not as yet determined just what that cause may be. The
error has been, we believe, in searching too exclusively by the
microscope and by certain laboratory methods, and not sufficiently along
clinical and bio-chemical lines. For it must be recognized that all the
cells of the body are continually bathed in the vitalizing fluid of the
blood, whence they derive their nutriment, and into which, with the
lymphatics, they return the products of their vital action, by anabolism
and catabolism.

By exclusion, therefore, we are reduced to seek the etiology of cancer
along other lines, and about all that is left is metabolism, as
influenced by advancing, so-called civilization, which relates very
largely to diet and mode of life. This we will take up later, but will
first examine some of the scientific findings in regard to the blood in
cancer, and data relating to the various secretions and excretions of
the body bearing upon metabolism in this disease.

That the blood shows great changes in advanced cancer is recognized by
all, as is clinically manifested by the intense cachexia and anæmia
commonly present and always strongly marked toward the end, of which the
cytology has been very fully studied and presented by Türk. When then
examined there is found to be a marked reduction of red cells, low
hæmoglobin index, and distinct leucocytosis, with greatly diminished
alkalescence.

The reported changes in the blood have also varied with the location of
the malignant disease, according as it may interfere mechanically or
otherwise with the function of certain organs, which fact naturally
obscures the question of the true relationship of the blood to cancer.
Thus, it is stated that in cancer of the liver and pancreas there is
always leucocytosis and glycogen, and that “cancer appears to interfere
greatly with the function of the liver as a destroyer of intestinal
toxins, they pass into the general circulation, probably cause the
glycogen reaction, and at least part of the leucocytosis, and very often
give rise to fever.” There are also other microscopical alterations in
the blood in late cancer. Thus, degenerative change in the leucocytes
are common, with derangement in the normal proportion of their different
forms, as also changes in the erythrocytes, with nucleated red cells and
megalocytes in severest cases.

Price Jones in a study of the blood in 30 cases of cancer (9 of the
breast) found the red blood cells diminished on an average of 6 per
cent., the white blood cells increased 38 per cent., lymphocytes
increased by 10 per cent., large mononuclear cells increased 164 per
cent. and polynuclears 42 per cent. Burnham states that in the severe
grades of anæmia with malignant disease, poikilocytosis is marked, and
nucleated cells of both normoblastic and megaloblastic type may be
present. The red corpuscles may be reduced to 2,500,000, and
exceptionally to 1,000,000. Cohnreich in a very technical study of blood
from cancer subjects, observed very great increase in the resisting
power of the red blood cells to osmotic tension, that is, in regard to
their hæmoglobin, which he believed to be of diagnostic value in
doubtful cases.

Unfortunately, there have been relatively few studies of the plasma of
the blood in this or other diseases; and yet the condition of this fluid
must be of the utmost importance, as from it are derived the nutrient
principles not only of the solid constituents of the blood, but also
those of the entire system, about 8 per cent. of it being serum albumen
and serum globulin. It also holds in solution the phosphates,
carbonates, sulphates, and chlorides, the latter often varying greatly,
and being chiefly responsible for the isotonic relation of cells and
serum. In cancerous cachexia a diminution of carbonic acid, a constantly
diminished alkalinity, and an increase of acid principles of the blood
have been fully demonstrated, pointing in all probability to the
existence of an acid intoxication. The formation of the corpuscular
elements of the blood must be greatly interfered with when metastases
occur in the blood making organs, the lymphatic tissue, bone, marrow,
and spleen, which probably occur more frequently than is generally
recognized. It seems that the toxic secretion from a cancerous mass has
a distinct action upon the blood, for after complete removal there is
often observed an increase of hæmoglobin, as I have witnessed, and a
high leucocytosis has disappeared after the removal of schirrus of the
breast, only to return again with the recurrence of the tumor.
Abderhalden states that in from two to three weeks after the operative
removal of cancer, certain defensive ferments can no longer be found in
the serum.

Many laboratory studies have been made upon the chemistry of cancer
tissue, seeking to determine the nature of the toxin produced, and its
experimental effect on animals, but thus far no great results have been
obtained. It has been observed, however, by Gruner that when cancer
juice is injected intra-venously a marked lymphocytosis arises, which is
followed by the appearance of large mast cell myelocytes in the blood.
This cancer juice is supposed to be autotoxic in cancer patients, and to
comprise toxic albuminoids, which being in quantities too great to be
quickly neutralized poison the system, especially the blood and the
hæmatopoietic organs.

In regard to the real bio-chemistry of cancer, we are still greatly in
the dark. Vast numbers of studies and researches have been made to
determine the real character and nature of the bio-chemical changes
which occur in cancerous tissue, and the mere recounting of the reported
findings and theories elaborated from them would occupy far more time
than can be profitably given in these lectures. Some have claimed very
positive findings which account in a measure, at least, for the
pathological conditions, while others, as Beebe, state that “the
chemical study of tumors is in its infancy. We have scarcely proceeded
far enough to know where the medical problems are, nor have methods now
available been perfected to such an extent as to enable a decisive
experiment to be made.” “No phase of metabolism,” says he, “has been
described in cancer which does not have a counterpart in non-cancerous
conditions. This applies to such questions as the nutritive relations
between the cancer cells and the normal body tissue, to the nitrogenous
balance, retention, elimination of sodium chloride, excretion of
acetone, the relation of ammonia excretion, and a possible acidosis.” He
adds, however, “Diet doubtless forms an important part in the growth of
cancer, possibly even in the origin of the disease.” It is encouraging,
therefore, to find that this able and careful laboratory investigator
recognizes, in a measure, the basic cause of diet, toward which all
evidence points so strongly, although the definite connection may not
yet have been established by laboratory methods.

In all our study in regard to the relation of diet to cancer it must be
remembered that there are divers elements and agencies which combine to
produce the many and various disordered conditions of the body, to which
we give the names of different diseases, and that cancer is no exception
to this general rule. For instance, in old-fashioned gout the patient
may have consumed an excess of Port and Madeira wine for years before
the system finally rebelled and acute gout resulted; and among the
causes for the systemic reaction we know that frequently it is great
mental strain or shock which has so disturbed metabolism that the wine
was no longer tolerated. Much the same is true in regard to cancer and
nitrogenous diet. And we will see later that mental disturbance and
nerve strain or shock often seem to be causative elements; also that
constipation, or intestinal stasis, is so common in cancer subjects that
it must be looked upon as one of the contributing causes among others,
to be mentioned later.

Although it is quite possible that many of the reported bio-chemical
changes found in primary cancerous tissue and metastases may not be of
etiological importance, it may be interesting to briefly refer to some
of them as indicating the vital alteration in tissues connected with
what we recognize as malignancy; even as in acute and chronic gout the
affected tissues exhibit abnormal conditions in regard to uratic
deposit.

Many writers, some of them dating back many years, agree that albuminous
constituents predominate in cancer tissue, and, as in actively growing
structures in general, sugar forming substances abound. Wolter states
that cancer of the breast contains 20 per cent. more nucleo-proteids
than the normal breast. Casein is also present in breast cancers, and
the abundance of fatty matters, contained in the cells of such
neoplasms, is well known. In regard to the proteids, Wolff, after many
studies, concludes that their character is identical with that of normal
tissues, and it is only the quantitative distribution of these that
differentiates the tumor from the physiological tissue. Wells agrees
with others that there is no very distinctive character in the
bio-chemistry of malignant tumors, but by reason of their excessive
chemical component, as compared with benign tumors, they naturally show
a high content of nuclear proteins; they, therefore, contain a high
proportion of phosphorus and iron.

Interesting observations have also been made on other characteristics of
cancerous tissues, such as the great abundance of enzymes of great
variety which are actively autolytic, also in regard to certain
relations of cholesterin, in regard to which Ewing has recently said,
“There appears to be something in the chemical or mechanical nature of
the irritation of cholesterin which is peculiarly effective in producing
atypical proliferation of epithelium”; this has been found to be no less
than 65 per cent. greater in quantity in fatty deposits, as in the
mesentery, in subjects of cancer than in healthy persons, etc., etc. It
would weary you to no purpose to attempt to refer further to the
bewildering mass of research studies in connection with the
bio-chemistry of cancer which are found in special literature: much of
it is fragmentary and some of it contradictory, but all has its value as
contributory to our knowledge of the actual conditions developed in
connection with cancer growth; but up to the present time it cannot be
claimed that any very practical results have been thus attained which
will aid us in treating the disease.

As all cell life and proliferation of tissue depends on the activity of
the cell nuclei, much attention has been paid to the changes found in
them and the behavior of the centrosomes and chromosomes, all of which
is too technical for us to consider here: suffice to say, however, that
several observers have demonstrated heterotypic mitosis in malignant
tumors, and that histologic examination confirms what other judgment has
indicated, namely, that the cancer cell differs from a normal tissue
cell mainly in its aberrant action under some stimulus, probably derived
from the animal fluids by which it is surrounded. Thus we come back to
our original proposition, for these fluids are, of course, but a
reflection of the nutrition of the body or diet, as modified by the
action of the various organs, including the internal secretions; all
this is influenced again by the action of the nervous system.

It is difficult to produce definite proof in regard to the influence of
nervous and mental strain and shock in the production of cancer, but
careful observers have long claimed that there is such an influence, and
from what I have seen I am firmly convinced that in some way these
conditions often do so disturb the metabolism, or otherwise operate, in
such a manner that cancer results. The influence of the mind upon the
body is unquestionable, as has been so fully illustrated by Tuke, and
from what I have observed I cannot doubt but that the mental depression
common in those with the beginning of a process which they fear might
result in active cancer, has much to do with accelerating its growth;
whereas, on the other hand, the hopefulness which can arise with the
attempt to change the diseased process by diet and proper medication,
has much to do with the favorable results which may follow in suitable
cases. In the same way the constant fear of recurrence after operative
removal can have its share in inducing and perpetuating the metabolic
error which excites the tissues to renewed cancerous action. I know that
some of you will think that this is fanciful theorizing, but many a
scientific fact, in many branches of science, has been worked out from a
theory which at first has seemed fanciful.

We will now consider some of the data which have been recorded in regard
to the relation of the secretions and excretions of the body to cancer,
including the internal secretions.

Much labor has been expended, by very many observers, upon the analysis
of the _urine_ in connection with cancer, as that might be expected to
reveal the metabolic changes connected with this disease. While many
departures from the normal have been reported, and while under complete
volumetric analysis the urine of a subject of cancer is rarely if ever
that of health, it cannot be said that any definite and specific changes
have been established which may not be found in those without cancer;
although there have been several who have so claimed even diagnostic
signs from the urine. But minute, volumetric analysis is often of great
service in guiding the nutrition and medication of these patients, and
gross errors are continually met with, which have the greatest bearing
on the case in hand, as indicating very great metabolic disturbance: and
constantly the urinary excretion will be found to be extremely
deficient, both as to its quantity and its total solid elimination. In
one very interesting case of cancer of the breast, in a stout, flabby
lady, near 55, in private practice, the total daily quantity of the
urine, measured for weeks, is always very far below the normal amount;
and in spite of active medication it seems almost impossible to raise
the total daily solids excreted in the urine, to more than one-half of
that called for by the weight of the patient. We may now briefly
consider some salient points reported in connection with the urine in
cancer.

As remarked in regard to other elements in the study of the disease, it
would be very desirable to have a knowledge of the urine in
pre-cancerous stages of health, or ill health, and also in very early
cancer, likewise after surgical operations, that we might better
understand the metabolic changes which lead up to malignant disease; but
unfortunately these are exceedingly few and unsatisfactory, and almost
all the studies have been made in advanced cancer, and often when the
disease has affected vital organs, or when by its own poison it has
disturbed the workings of the economy.

Many observers agree that there is a disturbance of proteid metabolism
in cancer, and dependent upon this many deviations from normal are found
in the urine, some of which in turn are related to the inanition which
occurs. The _urea_ is almost invariably diminished, often very greatly,
as I have verified time and again in many cases.

A number of studies have been made upon the nitrogen partition in cancer
by Einhorn, Kahn, and Rosenblum, also by De Bloeme, Swart, and Terwen,
and others, showing an increase in colloid nitrogen, to more than double
the normal amount, increased elimination of xanthin, oxyproteic acid,
and urinary ammonia, together with many other changes which show that
disintegration of the protein elements is very imperfect and often
excessive. An interesting statement is made by Blumenthal that the
oxyproteic acids are increased even in very early cancer, and
independently of the size of the tumor and degree of cachexia, seemingly
showing them to have some specificity for cancer, because they have not
been found in other forms of malignancy. He also states that urobilin is
increased in a large proportion of cases of cancer, especially when
cachexia is setting in, and is a grave symptom.

Reid, who has confirmed many of these matters reported by others, says:
“I have found an increase of amino-acid nitrogen in practically every
case of cancer I have examined”; ... “Hence we can only infer that in
cancer, the liver, while not involved in the disease, is still unable,
for some reason, to perform its functions in synthetizing urea. The
organ is functionally injured, no lesions having been found to explain
its insufficiency”; or possibly ... “cancerous subjects form proteids
which the liver is unable to deal with, so that they are excreted
unchanged, or nearly so.” Degrez has made confirmatory studies along
these lines, and found the nitrogen disintegration very imperfect, with
increase of the ammonia fraction of nitrogen, and increased elimination
of xanthin bases. He states that “the toxicity of the urine is increased
apparently as the result of the presence of substances which have not
been fully oxidized.”

Notable changes have also been recorded concerning the _sulphur_
elements in the urine, with a great increase in neutral (unoxidized)
sulphur and a considerable excess of sulpho-cyanic acid, together with
an increase in sulphates and indican showing the results of intestinal
fermentation of protein elements, which also I have constantly observed.

The _chlorides_, on the other hand, are, as a rule, diminished in
cancer, especially in its late stages, when there is inanition or kidney
insufficiency; and probably any change in them has only a relation to
the nutrition of the patients, for the chlorides come from the food and
are commonly an index of the amount of nutriment absorbed. Robin finds
some relation between the excretion of chlorine and nitrogen, according
to the stage or degree in which the system is affected by cancer.

The _phosphates_ are known to be increased in the urine of cancer
subjects, although irregularly and in an inverse ratio to the chlorides;
as inanition increases there is greater autolysis of cellular structure,
and the nuclei yield an excess of phosphates, which are excreted in the
urine. A more or less general demineralization of the system through the
urine has been observed by several, and has been recognized as a
significant matter, and is of special importance when we consider what
an important part minerals take in the nourishment of cell life.

While the changes which have been observed in the urine in connection
with cancer are not wholly pathognomonic, but occur in connection with
other diseased states of the system, so that none of them can be
accepted as diagnostic of malignant disease, they all have a certain
significance as indicating the metabolic changes which accompany and, as
we believe, have much to do with the etiology of cancer; and, as stated
before, a careful, systematic, and frequently repeated volumetrical
analysis of the urine certainly assists greatly in the proper management
of these cases, that is when the departures from normal are carefully
studied and correctly interpreted.

The _saliva_, and its action, constitutes a very important part in the
process of digestion, and consequently of metabolism and the genesis of
cancer; far too little attention, however, has been paid to it
practically, in ordinary life or disease, although there have been many
laboratory studies and writings on the physiological action of this
secretion; but I have not been able to find in literature any
investigations relating to its condition in cancer. And yet the
experience and writings of Mr. Fletcher and others have demonstrated
wonderful results from perfect mastication and thorough insalivation,
and a careful consideration of digestion must convince every one of the
importance of this secretion in connection with nutrition, both in
health and disease.

Our time does not permit of more than a brief allusion to the subject,
but in cancer patients I have so constantly found the salivary secretion
acid, and often strongly so, instead of the normal alkaline or neutral,
that I cannot but believe that this condition has some bearing upon the
subject which we are studying; the saliva also is apt to be acid in
diabetes, which is closely allied to cancer. It is to be remembered that
the saliva, which amounts in health to between one and two quarts daily,
varying somewhat with the food, is not wholly for the purpose of
lubricating the mouth and facilitating deglutition, but its enzymes,
ptyalin and maltase, effect radical and important changes in the starchy
matters consumed. It is also to be remembered that the latter cannot be
acted upon by the stomach secretions, but must be passed on to the
influence of the pancreatic fluid in the small intestine, in case the
action of the saliva has not been effective; hence there follows delayed
and imperfect digestion, faulty metabolism, deranged nutrition, and
possibly tumor growth. The importance, therefore, of very slow eating,
thorough mastication, and perfect insalivation cannot be too strongly
insisted on, both as an element of importance in the prevention of
cancer, and also as a curative measure in patients in whom the diseased
process has already manifested itself.

The so-called _internal secretions_ have also been the subject of much
research and speculation of late years, in regard to their influence on
metabolism and the life processes of the economy, and many studies have
been made concerning their connection with cancer, which cannot be long
dwelt upon now; but there seems to be little doubt but that the
secretions of the ductless glands in common have much to do with
regulating the metabolism of the cells. We know, for instance, that
disease of the pituitary body produces bone disorder, resulting in
gigantism, that thyroid derangement results in myxœdema, and that
disease of the supra-renal capsules gives rise to Addison’s disease, or
bronzed skin; and it is not at all impossible that the derangement of
secretion of one or more of these and other organs may be an element in
the disordered action of certain epithelial cells, resulting in cancer.
Harrower calls attention to the fact that cancer is essentially a
disease of that period of life when certain of the ductless glands lose
their normal function, this loss entailing related changes in the whole
chain of interrelated functions of the ductless glands.

The _supra-renal_ glands by their secretion have, as we know, great
vaso-constrictor influence, and their complete removal is followed by
death; it is more than possible that some failure in this secretion
allows the exuberant blood to supply cancerous growths. Sajous says:
“Certain growths, particularly the more malignant forms of sarcoma and
carcinoma, seem closely connected with adrenal insufficiency and its
normal consequences,” and there have been some clinical and research
data confirming such a conclusion. Sajous further says, “The adrenals,
as supporters of the thyroid apparatus in the defensive process, and in
sustaining oxidation, metabolism, and nutrition, seem to offer a new
clew to the pathogenesis and treatment of cancer that is worthy of
further inquiry.”

The _pancreas_ has been thought to have some influence in a perverted
metabolism leading to cancer, Kahle stating that there is a retention of
silica in that organ in cancer patients, to even double the normal
amount. A treatment of cancer introduced by Beard, also strongly
presented by Saleeby, by trypsin and amylopsin, the enzymes of the
pancreatic fluid, excited some attention a while ago; but unfortunately
no satisfactory results have thus far been obtained from this line of
medication, as was fully demonstrated by Bainbridge at the New York Skin
and Cancer Hospital, in one hundred cases.

The _pituitary gland_ by its secretion has undoubtedly some coordinating
power, with the adrenals and thyroid, over the processes of metabolism,
and a number of observers have regarded it as of importance in
connection with the genesis of cancer. Little has recently reported some
cases of cancer in which _pituitary extract_ with that of the pancreas
has produced remarkable results.

The _thyroid_ is now recognized as playing an important part in
assisting metabolism, and, like the adrenals and pituitary, its complete
removal, with the parathyroids, in animals is followed by death. While
the study of the hormones is still in its infancy, there seems to be no
question but that the endocrinous glands act conjointly, the one
influencing the other, and that together they exert a very great
influence in the life processes of the body and on the behavior of its
component cells. The thyroid has been shown to be one of the main
factors in the management of calcium within the body, which is believed
to be an element in cancer, and enhances the catabolism of toxic wastes,
which are etiologic elements in this disease. Many have reported
favorably on the effect of thyroid feeding in cancer, and after an
experience with it in many cases I am convinced that it has been one of
the means which contributed to the good results obtained. On the other
hand it has been claimed by Stuart-Low that the surgical removal of the
thyroid, or part of it, or ligation of the thyroid blood vessels has
arrested cancer, in several cases.

_Thymus gland_ feeding has also been reported on favorably by a number
of observers (Rohdenburg, Bullock, and Johnson, also Gwyer), they
reporting relief of pain and improved general conditions, notably gain
in weight and increased hæmoglobin in all but one of sixteen cases,
though some of them died. On the other hand Ross reports most
unfavorably on the administration of thymus, which he gave to some
inoperable and hopeless cancer cases, in which he said that in two or
three weeks the tumors had quadrupled in size and the condition of the
patients was very much worse; the same occurred also when some cancer
patients were given calcium salts freely. Ross makes some interesting
suggestions in regard to the thymus, and its relation to calcium and
magnesium; these latter are freely utilized in the growth of bone up to
the age of twenty-five years, by which time the thymus gland has quite
disappeared; but after this time these salts tend to have pathological
relations in various tissues, and also cancer becomes frequent.

The internal secretions of the _testicles_ and _ovaries_ are also
thought to have some share in metabolic processes, and observations have
been made in regard to their influence in cancer. Thus Cahen reported
that Beatson’s operation of castration for cancer, done first in 1896,
had been repeated by many, so that Lott had reported 99 cases including
his own. Of these in 23.2 per cent. the operation caused a distinct
improvement in the cancer. In 15 cases the improvement persisted for a
year, in 4 cases for 4½ years and in one case for over 5 years. Cahen
operated on seven women with remarkable results; in two cases life was
prolonged 4 and 6 years respectively. Others, however, have shown by
statistics, that damage to the ovaries by disease, or their removal by
operation, greatly increases the proclivity to cancer. Several writers
have connected cancer with the waning of the sexual powers, and the
suggestion is made by Sherrington and Copeman that in the period which
antedates the cancer age, the reproductive glands, by means of internal
secretions, are able to inhibit the growth of cancer.

In looking back over what has been observed in regard to the secretions,
including those of ductless glands, we see that very strong evidence has
accumulated to show that they have a very intimate connection with the
development of cancer, as was to be expected, since they are very
important factors in connection with metabolism.

We have also seen that while there has not been demonstrated any very
definite and specific change in the bio-chemistry of tumors, and no
specific enzymes or poison secreted by cancer cells which can
communicate the disease, there is evidence that the disordered cells
secrete a something which deranges the blood and ultimately tends to end
life; for the blood in advancing cancer undergoes very radical,
degenerative changes, some of which improve decidedly when a cancerous
mass is removed surgically, but return with the regrowth of the tumor.

We have also seen that the urine manifests alterations which show a
disturbed metabolism, and that the saliva has an abnormal acidity
leading to disturbed amylaceous digestion.

We have further seen that there is evidence that the internal secretions
of many organs, probably, through their influence on metabolism, are
factors of importance in connection with the genesis and cure of cancer.
Little well says, “Cancer is a disease of disordered nutrition, as a
result of which cells revert to a primitive stage, which permits
reproduction. The disordered nutrition is due to relative hypofunction
of the ductless glands.” In later lectures we shall consider the basic
causes of this deranged nutrition, which, as has been already intimated,
has much to do with diet and the various elements of life which tend to
induce functional and other derangements of the system, many of which
are included in and influenced by what we term the advance of
civilization.




                               LECTURE IV
                       RELATION OF DIET TO CANCER


In our earlier lectures we saw that cancer was undoubtedly a diseased
action of originally normal tissue cells, due largely to perverted
metabolism, the special features of which were brought out last week. In
the second lecture we studied the frequency and geographical
distribution of cancer, which was found to be very different for various
peoples in diverse sections of the earth, and which we saw was
proportioned in a great measure according to their diet and mode of
life. In this lecture we will examine into the details of these matters
more particularly, and endeavor to discover their practical bearing upon
the prevention and cure of cancer.

For the proper understanding of the relation of food and drink to
cancer, and the satisfactory application of the principles involved, it
is necessary to bear well in mind the chemistry of the body and the
relation to nutrition of the various elements which contribute to form
healthy and diseased tissues.

The human body is composed of some fifteen different elements, the
relative proportions of which may be understood by the following table
from Sherman, which represents probably as approximately correct an
average as any that can be given.

                       COMPOSITION OF THE HUMAN
                                 BODY

                                            _Per
                                           cent._
                      Oxygen, about        65
                      Carbon, about        18
                      Hydrogen, about      10
                      Nitrogen, about       3
                      Calcium, about        2
                      Phosphorus, about     1
                      Potassium, about      0.35
                      Sulphur, about        0.25
                      Sodium, about         0.15
                      Chlorine, about       0.15
                      Magnesium, about      0.05
                      Iron, about           0.004
                      Iodine   } very
                      Fluorine } minute
                      Silicon  } traces

As the actual composition of the body is changing day by day, through
the activities of the system, so that it is commonly believed that after
some years all the tissues are entirely renewed, the daily wear and
tear, as also the material expended in heat and activity, must be
supplied by the diet. For the ordinary requirements of the system, in
health, the appetite serves as a guide, which should suffice in man as
in wild animals, to preserve the balance of nutrition. But man has also
the power to _gratify the taste_, which must be recognized in our study
as distinct from the satisfying of the appetite; and the refinements of
civilization have added so greatly to the temptation of wrong and
over-eating and drinking, as they have to many other temptations, that
it is questionable if reason, and what is often spoken of as the natural
instinct for food, can be trusted in mankind.

It is to be remembered that the advance of civilization, and the
facilities of transportation and cold storage, have brought from far and
near an innumerable number and variety of articles for food and drink,
including condiments, which bear no relation to the few simple articles
formerly consumed; even the fruits which we eat are rarely ripened fully
by nature, but are picked more or less green, and undergo an artificial
ripening without the action of the sun, which is really akin to decay.
In the combination and preparation of articles of food also, so-called
civilization and refinement have made the greatest departure from the
simple life of the aborigines, who are free from cancer, and with
increasing ease and wealth throughout the civilized world more and more
individuals are sharing in unnecessary and often harmful indulgences,
more and more freely: and this is especially true of animal food, the
consumption of which has increased so greatly. Many other elements
likewise enter into the matter of the digestibility and consequent
nutritive power of food and drink; such are nervous conditions, rapid
eating, imperfect mastication and insalivation, heat and cold, character
of the air breathed, micro-organisms, etc., and all the various causes
which may derange the action of the digestive organs and so prevent the
perfect metabolism between nutrient material and the cells of the body,
as I tried to show you in some former lectures.

As is well known, the nutrition of man is supplied by the organic
substances, protein, carbohydrates, and fat; these are found in various
combinations in animal and vegetarian foods, and as a rule contain also
much of the inorganic or mineral substances necessary for the system;
all of these with water, and its salts, and oxygen, supplied by the
lungs, unite, through anabolism and catabolism, to build and maintain
the human body in health.

It is also well known that in order to preserve health and proper weight
there must exist in the economy a certain balance or equilibrium between
the amount of the ingesta and excreta, representing the various elements
which enter into nutrition; thus we speak of a nitrogen equilibrium, a
carbo-hydrate equilibrium, a phosphorus equilibrium, and iron
equilibrium, etc., some of which are disturbed continually in ill health
and in various diseases, including cancer, as has been shown in our last
lecture.

Until quite recently the principles of diet (even if not often carried
out in practice) have been established on lines laid down by Carl Voit,
of Munich; this eminent physiologist, after studying the dietary habits
of various classes of workers, claimed that the adult man of 150 pounds,
doing moderate muscular work, requires daily 118 grams of protein or
albuminous food, 56 grams of fat, and 500 grams of carbo-hydrate, with a
total fuel value of 3000 large calories, in order to maintain the body
in equilibrium. But the remarkable and scientific experiments of
Chittenden have demonstrated beyond question that perfect bodily and
nitrogenous equilibrium can be maintained with one-third of the amount
of protein called for by the Voit standard, and with a total value in
the diet of only about 1600 calories, or about one-half of that
indicated as necessary by Voit. These experiments were based on a group
of five men of varying ages, professors and instructors at Yale,
thirteen volunteers from the Hospital Corps of the United States Army,
and eight students in Yale, all thoroughly trained athletes, twenty-six
in all.

It would be quite beyond the scope of this lecture to enter at all into
the intricate questions connected with the metabolism of nitrogenous and
other foods, but Chittenden has well put the reasons “why prominence is
given to the establishment of nitrogenous equilibrium and why the
proteid intake assumes a greater importance than the daily amount of fat
and carbo-hydrate consumed. Fats and carbohydrates when oxidized in the
body are ultimately burned to simple gaseous products, viz., carbonic
acid and water. Hence these waste products are easily and quickly
eliminated and cannot exercise much deleterious influence, even when
formed in excess.... With protein foods, on the other hand, the story is
quite different. These substances when oxidized yield a row of
crystalline, nitrogenous products which ultimately pass out of the body
through the kidneys. Prior to their excretion, however, these
products—frequently spoken of as toxins—float through the body and may
exercise more or less of a deleterious influence upon the system, or,
being temporarily deposited, may exert some specific or local influence
that calls for speedy removal. Hence the importance of restricting the
production of these bodies to the minimal amount, owing to their
possible physiological effect and the part they are liable to play in
the causation of many diseased conditions.”

When we consider the small share which nitrogen plays in the composition
of the human frame, as shown in the table presented, only three per
cent., it is easy to see how an excess of nitrogenous food must
necessarily either pass off unassimilated or undergo imperfect
metabolism, and so derange the general metabolism; and this is found to
be the case in many conditions of disease, and, as has been shown, in
cancer. Chalmers Watson and others have shown in a most remarkable
manner, by animal experiments, that an excessive meat diet alters very
materially the microscopic structure of very many organs and portions of
the body.

Beneke, who is often quoted, was one of the first to seriously consider
the actual diet beneficial in cancer, his observations dating back to
1875 upon material in the service of Esmarck and Oldehop, who treated
patients according to his plan. While the diet he gives is not wholly
vegetarian, he limits the nitrogenous intake very greatly, and reported
some very favorable results, with the complete disappearance of some
malignant new formations.

Referring now to the data presented in the second lecture, in regard to
the frequency and geographical distribution of cancer, we can understand
better, on scientific grounds some of the reasons why cancer is so
steadily increasing in civilized communities, and why in some sections
of the earth it is less common, while certain aborigines have seemed to
be almost immune.

We found that in England the per capita consumption of meat was 130
pounds per year, and that it had doubled during the past fifty years,
while during the same period cancer had increased _four fold_; but in
Ireland, where the meat consumption was estimated in 1895 at only 40
pounds per capita, or less than one-third that in England, the cancer
death rate is very much lower, not much over one-half. We found that in
Italy, where the per capita consumption of meat was the smallest of any
European country the cancer death rate was almost the lowest. Also that
in certain other countries, where vegetarianism was the rule, cancer was
very infrequent, while among certain aborigines the disease was
practically unknown; but we found also that in both the latter classes
of individuals cancer has slowly increased, in proportion as the
inhabitants of different sections had come under the influence of modern
civilization, and adopted the dietary and other habits of foreigners.

In the United States cancer has certainly increased very greatly during
the last fifty years, and statistics were presented showing that in
seven of the largest cities, during the past five years, the number of
cancer deaths had augmented between seven and eight per cent. It is
known that the consumption of meat here has increased steadily, until in
a communication from the Bureau of Agriculture in Washington we learn
that it had recently reached the enormous amount of 172 pounds per
capita yearly, much more than in England.

Cancer has been repeatedly spoken of as a disease of civilization, and
there are many other elements besides meat to be considered in
connection with its etiology.

Coffee and tea are so widely and almost universally used in civilized
countries, and their apparently pleasant effect is so great that few
realize the harm that may result therefrom; although from time to time
their injurious effects, especially along the line of digestive and
nervous troubles, are dwelt on by medical writers. Of late years,
however, more attention has been paid to their influence on metabolism
and also to the relation of their consumption to the increase of cancer.
From a report to the House of Commons in England, Holland is shown to be
the largest per capita consumer of coffee of any country in Europe, and
the cancer death rate there in 1905 was among the highest, while Hungary
was the smallest consumer of coffee, and the cancer mortality in 1903
was only 39 per 100,000, or a little over one-third that in Holland. It
may be interesting to know that Thompson states that “the people of the
United States consume one-third of the total coffee produced, or more
than Germany, Austria, Hungary, France and the United Kingdom combined.
On the other hand England and her colonies consume one-half of the
world’s output of tea, and the United States but one-fifth of it.”

The scientific basis of a possible relationship of the consumption of
coffee and tea to the prevalence of cancer may be better understood when
we remember that caffeine and theine belong to the xanthin group, and
contain exactly the same equivalent of nitrogen as uric acid. A single
cup of coffee of fair strength, it is stated by Hutchinson, contains
from one to three grains of caffeine, and a cup of fairly strong tea
1.21 grains, or more than the average medicinal dose of this drug; and
all know how great may be the consumption of coffee and tea by some
individuals, and that many of the working class, especially, consume
enormous amounts of tea, which is kept brewing all day. Roberts has very
clearly demonstrated, by clever experiments, that tea interferes very
greatly with both the salivary and gastric digestion.

Alcohol, or some of its combinations, has also been shown by several
observers to be undoubtedly an element contributory to the causation of
cancer; this relates not only to countries or cities where the
consumption is the greatest or least, but also to various occupations,
in which statistics show the more or less abundant use of distilled or
fermented drinks, and deaths from the same, and in regard to total
abstainers; and a careful study of the subject makes it pretty clear
that the incidence of cancer corresponds in a measure with drinking
habits; that is, that cancer mortality is highest among those classes of
persons among whom primary or secondary mortality from alcoholism is
greatest. There are so many elements to be taken into consideration in
connection with the derangement of metabolism which leads to cancer,
that it is difficult to fix the precise influence which each may exert;
but in watching cancer cases for any length of time it is easy to see
the harmful effect when alcoholic beverages are indulged in, and the
improvement when all such are absolutely excluded.

An interesting confirmation of the beneficial results of a low diet and
simple life, as regards cancer, is found in certain reports of
Commissioners of Prisons and Asylums in England, where the matter has
been studied, as given by Russell. “Asylums contain an excessive number
of persons who have inherited or acquired constitutional weaknesses, and
in many cases tendencies toward consumption or cancer; also many
alcoholics who are prone to these maladies. Yet the habits and rules of
these institutions reduce the cancer rate much below the rate of the
classes from which they are drawn, and below the rate of both occupied
and unoccupied persons.” The same is observed in regard to many
religious orders, where the members lead a very simple and frugal life,
and where cancer is reported to be almost unknown.

Kessler has called attention to the disturbance of sulphur partition in
cancer in connection with diet, and the desirability of excluding those
foods exhibiting an excess of sulphur, giving lists of the same and
indicating a satisfactory diet.

Packard has made a strong argument in regard to the value and importance
of the mineral elements contained in plant life, in connection with the
disturbances in these same elements which has been observed in
connection with cancer, as we have already seen. He recalls that modern
chemistry teaches that the inorganic principles of the vegetable kingdom
are absolutely necessary to the highest degree and type of animal tissue
and health, and resistance to disease. Plant life is the connection
between the minerals and salts of the earth and animal life, but in the
manufacture or refinement, and cooking, of products of the vegetable
kingdom, many of them are largely demineralized; this especially
illustrated in the case of fine white wheat flour, rice, potatoes (in
peeling and cooking), etc. So that while animals get plenty of mineral
matter from plants and the earth, man gets but little, and while the
herbivorous animals are rarely affected with cancer, civilized man is
succumbing to it more and more. It is stated that among savage tribes,
who are practically free from cancer, the water in which vegetables are
cooked is also consumed as food, thus securing all the salts. The same
idea has been popularly presented to the public in a startling manner by
McCann in a book which, with a great deal of verbiage contains a large
amount of valuable information concerning nutrition, and its disturbance
by erroneous, or worse, preparation and administration of food.

Possibly there are other dietary elements which may play some part in
the causation of cancer, but the demonstrated facts in regard to them
are so few and uncertain that they need not detain us here, although it
is certainly desirable to investigate any that seem to have reasonable
support.

Some of these which have been suggested probably have to do with local
irritant action on the digestive organs, as we have previously seen that
local irritation undoubtedly plays an important part in the
determination of the actual time of occurrence and site of the cancerous
disease. Thus, some have ascribed cancer to hot food or drink, or to
stimulating drink, condiments, etc. It is quite possible that these
contribute to the development of cancer in the pylorus, irritating the
secreting cells in their passage. Mayo says: “In civilized man one-third
of all cancers are seated in the stomach. This is not known to be the
case in uncivilized man or in animals. There should, therefore, be
something—some one cause—which causes this preponderance. The acid
secretion may favor its development, for when we come to the colon, also
with an acid secretion, we again meet with cancer, and we seldom see it
in the alkaline, small intestine. Gastric ulcer, which may be
pre-cancerous, is connected with hyperacidity.” In Scandinavia cancer of
the stomach is remarkably frequent, according to Soëgaard, thus, of 1235
cases in Norway, 73.9 per cent. were in that location. In our last
lecture we found that cancer in general was connected with a lowered
alkalescence of the blood, and all our studies show hyperacidity to be
related to cancer genesis; and nitrogenous acidity, or uric acid (purin,
xanthin, etc.), undoubtedly plays a great part in inducing malignant
action in tissues, as Haig has so long contended, even in regard to
cancer.

The increasing frequency of cancer of the mouth, œsophagus, and stomach
in men certainly looks toward an irritating character of substances
which traverse these regions, including alcoholic drinks, and the
irritant effect of tobacco should not be overlooked in regard to mouth
lesions. But of the millions who use tobacco only very few are affected
with cancer, and only those who are predisposed thereto by some
metabolic disturbance, whose true character and other manifestations are
not yet fully determined. We have already referred to the practice of
so-called betel chewing in the Far East as a frequent cause of cancer
within the mouth, also to the wearing of the Kangri charcoal baskets in
India, for warmth, causing a burn on the front of the body which may
develop into epithelioma; it is claimed, however, by some that of the
many cases of “Kangri burn,” but few result in epithelioma.

There are yet other considerations concerning the relation of diet to
cancer which are worthy of attention. We have mentioned some principal
agents, which seem unquestionably to have an influence in the production
and continuance of cancer, namely, proteids, coffee and tea, and
alcoholics. But millions of human beings partake of these with apparent
impunity, while in the relatively few they appear to have cancer-genetic
powers. This need not surprise or puzzle us any more than do the many
other problems in medicine which we are seeking to solve: for we know
how often it happens that the system reaches a point where certain
things, once well borne, are no longer tolerated. We know, for instance,
that Port and Madeira wine certainly can cause gout, but with many
individuals they may be indulged in freely for some time before this
result follows: likewise that tobacco may even be abused for a long
time, without apparent ill effects, when suddenly there is a revulsion
of the system and the slightest use of tobacco will be intolerable: also
that many edible substances which have long been well borne, will at a
certain time act unfavorably and excite eruptions, urticaria, acne,
eczema, etc.

Psoriasis also furnishes an illustration which may be of service in
understanding the relation of diet to cancer; for psoriasis is
characterized by a disordered epithelial growth, which both shows on the
surface and manifests itself by epithelial prolongations into the
corium, which are quite comparable to the ingrowing cellular masses of
early cancer: moreover cancer is not very rare in psoriasis patients. In
this eruption it has been very clearly demonstrated, clinically and
experimentally, that error in nitrogenous metabolism is commonly at the
bottom of the eruption, which has been seen to promptly disappear
entirely simply under an absolute vegetarian diet, correctly regulated,
excluding also coffee and alcohol, without the use of any medical
treatment whatever, internal or external; but, of course, this result
cannot always be obtained, and sometimes the eruption will relapse
during what is thought to be a strict vegetarian diet. There must,
therefore, be some systemic disturbance which causes nutritive material,
at some particular time, thus to derange cell action in the eruptions
mentioned, and the same is true in regard to the production of cancer.

Some years ago Braithwaite called attention to the occurrence of cancer
among certain peoples who were vegetarians, and attributed it to the
great amount of salt which they consumed. While the suggestion of salt
being a cause of cancer has been ridiculed, it is quite possible that a
great excess of sodium chloride may disturb the salt equilibrium in the
blood, by replacing the potassium which is so necessary for proper
cellular nutrition, and also by hindering the excretion of uric acid, as
Haig has pointed out.

When we inquire into the cause of the systemic disturbance which tends
to such faulty metabolism that the nutrition of cellular structures is
deranged, even to the degree of taking on malignant action, we find many
possible elements, more or less connected with what is known as modern
civilization, to which we have time to but briefly allude. Williams has
shown pretty clearly that wealth, with its tendency to luxury and
idleness, greatly increased the proclivity to cancer: not only is this
observed in different countries, but in certain cities the difference is
very striking between the cancer mortality in sections which are
occupied by the rich and well-to-do, and those in which the poorer
classes are herded. Also in England it was found in one decennium that
cancer mortality was more than twice as great among the well-to-do men,
having no specific occupation, as among occupied males in general, the
ratio being 96 to 44.

Change in the mode of life, and sudden changes of environment have also
been found to have a great effect in the production of cancer, as has
already been mentioned in another lecture.

Finally, for our time does not permit a fuller discussion, nervous
conditions unquestionably can and very often do exert a profound
influence on the secretion of the various organs of the body, and can so
disturb digestion, metabolism, and nutrition that the most varied
results may follow, to which the names of different diseases are given;
so that nerve strain, more or less incident to modern life, must be
accredited with a certain share of influence in the production of
cancer. The part which imperfect and deficient intestinal and urinary
excretion play in inducing or perpetuating the disease will be treated
of in later lectures.

In our next lecture we will consider certain matters relating to the
medical treatment of cancer, but from long experience and study I am
firmly convinced that such measures are of relatively little service
unless coupled with a rigid care of the diet and hygiene. As Bell
remarks, “Cancer is essentially a disease supervening upon a persistent
neglect of hygienic laws.” It is a disease of sub-oxidation, and all the
hygienic elements of importance in tuberculosis are equally necessary in
cancer; fresh air and sunlight with, as far as possible, an ideal
regulation of life in all its aspects, are indispensable.

Inasmuch as there is no specific medical antidote for cancer, and we
cannot be certain of securing at once the metabolism of health, it is
wise to remove and to keep away from the system those articles which
have been shown to have more or less influence in its production,
namely, animal proteids, coffee, tea, and alcoholics. Time does not
admit a discussion of vegetarianism, nor is it necessary, for there is
abundant evidence in literature and on every side that perfect health
can be maintained thereby, and I went over the subject pretty thoroughly
two years ago. The vegetable kingdom contains protein enough to build up
and maintain the tissues of the body, as is shown in animals, and an
extra number of calories can be easily obtained from butter, of which a
quarter of a pound contains some 800 calories, or fully one-third of the
total daily quantity required by most individuals. The details of a
purely vegetarian diet, which experience has shown to be of the greatest
value in cancer, can be worked out for individual cases as required. I
am also firmly convinced that in this absolutely vegetarian diet, with
other proper hygienic and medicinal measures, to be detailed next week,
we shall find a great power for the prevention of cancer; although many
persons are already so saturated with poisoned blood and tissues from
prolonged errors of life, that perhaps no very striking general effect
on the community can be obtained therefrom in this generation.

In closing this lecture I must again urge upon you the necessity of
great patience and perseverance, with very much careful study of the
patient in all particulars, over a great length of time, if really
favorable results are to be obtained in cancer; and this is true whether
the disease be incipient, or fully developed, or even post-operative.
The causes of cancer are deep seated, and, as with many chronic
affections, there is no tendency to continue an improvement once begun,
but under a return to the same conditions as before the disease will
certainly assert itself. We have learned the lesson of assiduous
perseverance in tuberculosis; let us learn it in regard to cancer.




                               LECTURE V
                      MEDICAL TREATMENT OF CANCER


It is remarkable that so little serious attention has been paid to the
medical treatment of cancer, in standard works, in view of the
occasional strong statements and reports which have appeared from time
to time in current literature and in occasional books, dating back for
many years. Much of this, of course, relates to imperfect observation
and erroneous diagnosis, and also to crude medical knowledge, but there
have been also plenty of good men, who knew the disease and have
reported favorable results, and even the complete disappearance of
cancer, under dietetic regimen and proper medication alone, without
operative interference of any kind.

Not to go back too far, reference can be made to Lambe, who one hundred
years ago wrote clearly in regard to the causation of cancer from
luxurious living, and adduced strong proof to show the effect of diet in
curing certain cases of undoubted cancer of the breast and uterus, the
diagnosis of which was confirmed by prominent surgeons of the day,
several of whom endorsed the vegetarian diet. Abernethy wrote pointedly,
soon after, regarding the constitutional origin of tumors and says,
“There can be no subject which I think more likely to interest the mind
of the surgeon, than that of an endeavor to amend and alter the state of
a cancerous constitution. The best timed and best conducted operation
brings with it nothing but disgrace, if the diseased propensities of the
constitution are active and powerful. It is after an operation that, in
my opinion, we are most particularly incited to regulate the
constitution, lest the disease should be revived or renewed by its
disturbance.” He then gives an endorsement of Lambe’s dietetic treatment
of cancer, and presents several reasons why it should be fairly tried.

In the classical work of Walshe we find numerous references to the
constitutional nature of cancer, original or quoted from recognized
authorities, as well as expressions in regard to the futility of
expecting that surgical interference would cure the real disease in any
great proportion of cases. He says, “It would in theory appear that the
removal of a tumor cannot in itself cure the disease, as the local
formation is but a symptom of a general vice of the economy.”... “This
tissue being, as the normal textures, the seat of nutrition, is like
them susceptible of its disordered actions,” and he alludes more or less
to the effect of diet on the disease.

The late Willard Parker, one of New York’s great surgeons, in a study of
397 cases of cancer of the female breast, observed from 1830 to 1880,
wrote very strongly in regard to the constitutional relations of cancer.
In considering the etiology he places constitutional causes first, and
says, “luxurious living, and particularly excess in animal food,
increases the waste products of the body, and if coupled with
insufficient exercise, the waste products are retained in the system and
have a tendency to produce abnormal growths.”... “Cancer is to a great
degree one of the final results of a long continued course of error in
diet, and a strict dietetic regimen is, therefore, a chief factor in the
treatment, preventative and curative.” Concluding his study he says,
“There is such a _consensus_ of opinion as to the advisability of early
removal of the growth, that a discussion of the subject would be
useless. So then, in the first place, let us remove the tumor, and
thoroughly. But after we have done so, after we have taken it out by the
very roots, is this sufficient? No. We must then adopt the means stated
above to prevent a second development. We must change the diathesis; we
must seek to modify the patient’s constitution so that it will be no
longer prone to reproduce the disease: and then only may the surgeon be
satisfied that he has done his duty.” He further says, “In regard to the
effect of abstemiousness on cancer I can speak with great positiveness,
that vegetable, or at least a very bland diet, does check the progress
of the disease, and, in some cases now under treatment, has been
attended by an alleviation of symptoms; and in a few instances even by a
recession of the growth.” He also quotes from Sir Astley Cooper some
strong language which, as he says, “shows a broader and more enlightened
view of the subject than is contained in the writings of some more
recent observers, who have supposed that they were working far in
advance of the great English surgeon”; the rather long quotation then
given proves that that great surgeon also believed absolutely in the
constitutional nature of cancer.

Sir James Paget is often mentioned by writers, sometimes even with
derision, as a believer in the Constitutional Nature of Cancer, and his
words are very strong; says he, “I believe it to be constitutional, in
the sense of having its origin and chief support in the blood, by which
the constitution of the whole body is maintained,” and speaks at some
length in his lecture, in support of this view; I will give you one
other small quotation. “The existence of the morbid material in the
blood, whether in the rudimental or in the effective state, constitutes
the general predisposition to cancer,” etc. It is remarkable that the
views of this prince of surgeons and pathologists should not have
carried more weight in regard to cancer, when his other views are so
well accepted.

Time does not permit us even to refer to the great mass of more or less
similar views and corroborative evidence scattered in books and current
literature during the last fifty years, but a few more references may be
given. In 1884, and again lately, Merriam has called attention to cancer
occurring as a reversion of tissue cells to earlier or embryonic forms
under the influence of a disordered, or as he calls it, a poisoned blood
stream, from over nutrition from a meat diet; and Haig has long
maintained that uric acid is a prominent factor in the etiology of
cancer.

While few will agree with Haig in all his conclusions, there is no doubt
but that a faulty nitrogenous metabolism plays a not inconsiderable part
in the causation of many diseased conditions, as has been also shown in
a previous lecture to be true in regard to cancer: and while it may not
be actually uric acid or urea which does the harm, as these are
relatively harmless end products of metabolism, it is true that the
purin and xanthin bases, of many forms, and imperfectly oxidized
nitrogenous elements, are active agents in the production of disease.
Venus and Isenberg have both written very strongly in regard to the
unquestioned value of a vegetarian diet in cancer, the former citing
many supporters of the view, from ancient times to the present. If time
permitted any amount more of corroborative evidence could be given in
regard to the connection of cancer with metabolic disorders.

There have been many scattered articles concerning the chemico-pathology
of cancer, all looking in much the same direction as that which we are
pursuing, which cannot even be alluded to, but brief mention must be
made of a most illuminating and suggestive study by Bristol. Reviewing
the many theories of the etiology of neoplasms he shows pretty clearly
that cell reproduction comes from outside the cell, or from the
surrounding cell medium by a process of diffusion, or by a definite
chemical attraction, and is closely associated with the nutrition and
growth of the cell, especially the nucleus; also that a fixed ratio
between the salts in the blood, lymph, and tissues is necessary for
normal activity and reproduction of cells; further that a disturbance in
this ratio and an upset in the chemical equilibrium will lead to
abnormal metabolism, growth, and reproduction, and result in an atypical
growth in the local area involved.

As before remarked, it seems strange that the medical profession and the
public have been so slow in accepting the views here presented. But both
have become so obsessed with the idea that nothing can be done for
cancer except operative procedure of some kind, and so dazzled with the
glamour of modern surgery, so fascinated with the apparent definiteness
of laboratory proceedings, and so attracted by the glory of purely
scientific research, that it is very difficult for any other doctrines
to make headway: moreover, any dietary or medical treatment,
prophylactic or curative, is very tedious and also difficult, in the way
of attention to minute details, etc., and patients weary of restrictions
and are restless at seeing little or slow progress made. Haig found the
same difficulty with Hospital patients, but does not hesitate to state
that in private practice “some undoubted cases of cancer have gotten
well” under his dietary restrictions.

But when it is remembered that it is calculated that, under present
existing conditions and treatment, fully 90 per cent. of those attacked
with cancer ultimately die from it, and that there were last year nearly
50,000 recorded deaths from this cause in the “Registration area” of the
United States, covering but two-thirds of its population, and that the
disease is rapidly and surely increasing, it behooves the Medical
Profession to put forth the best efforts possible to stay the progress
of the disease. In New York City, according to the Weekly Bulletins of
the Board of Health, there were from May to November, 1914, in 26 weeks,
2173 deaths from Cancer, Malignant Tumor, or an average of 83.5 per
week, almost twelve deaths daily from malignant disease.

Operative surgery has unquestionably been of great service in certain
cases and along certain lines of cancer, and the claim for the earliest
possible removal of morbid growths is certainly a just and proper one;
moreover, with our present knowledge it is perhaps wise to attempt to
remove the offending mass while there is some hope or prospect of
benefit, and personally I am occasionally advising this in proper cases.
X-ray and radium have also their sphere of usefulness in a certain class
or group of cases, but the excessive exploitation of the latter, not
long ago, did harm in raising false hopes in multitudes of sufferers,
and as these were shattered so also was confidence shaken in regard to
all help for cancer from other than surgical removal.

But every one who has been brought much into contact with cancer knows
full well what a mass of recurrent cases exist, possibly many of them
due to bad operation, in regard to which surgery has to acknowledge that
it can offer nothing more, that they are inoperable and therefore they
are regarded as incurable. Every one also knows how many cases there are
which have advanced so far before coming to a competent surgeon, that
they are also inoperable. Every one likewise knows that there are
numerous cases of cancer in internal regions, and in certain localities,
and presenting peculiar features, which are also recognized as
inoperable, at least with any proper justification. Thus it may safely
be said that of the total number of cases of cancer existing at any one
time, which would be included under the above classes, fully 50 per
cent. are such that operative surgery can offer no hope of material
benefit: also, it must be acknowledged that but a relatively small
proportion of all cancer cases are likely to secure the very best
surgical service, such as claims the highest percentage of success.

For this large number of hopeless victims of this dire disease, at
least, proper dietary and medical treatment should be most carefully
studied and patiently applied, with the hope and expectation that the
same, if correctly employed, would more or less hinder or check its
progress or prevent a recurrence after operation. But experience shows
that such measures, if taken promptly and thoroughly, can also prevent
the development of early threatening lesions into those of malignant
character, suggesting surgical removal, and these should never be
neglected when there is the slightest suspicion of cancer. For it must
be acknowledged that the surgery of cancer is only an attempt at the
physical removal of a something, which medical science and art should
not have allowed to develop out of normal tissue. And in the matter of
the general prophylaxis of cancer it is certainly worth while to
consider and act strongly upon the facts which have been presented,
especially in those individuals who have any hereditary suspicions, or
who exhibit the habit of body or life which could lead to the
development of cancer.

The medical care of cancer, as of all diseases, naturally includes both
prophylaxis and the treatment of a morbid condition which has already
developed; the former of these is always considered to be of the highest
importance.

_Prophylaxis of Cancer._ From what has preceded in this and other
lectures it can readily be understood that the prevention of cancer lies
largely along dietary and hygienic lines, including such medical
attention as shall secure healthy action of the secreting and excreting
organs. If the figures and facts heretofore given are correct, if cancer
has surely been observed to increase under certain conditions of life,
if it is found to be absent or relatively rare under certain other
conditions of living, if cancer has been known to disappear
spontaneously in certain individuals, especially when they have changed
their mode of living, it must then follow that when the exactly correct
habit and state of life are continually assumed the disease will not
occur.

In other words, when the blood stream nourishing the tissues is ideally
correct, the individual cells of the body perform their functions
normally, and as each cell is worn out it is removed by a healthy
catabolism and renewed by a normal anabolism, and homologous cells then
replace those which have ceased to be able to perform their function. On
the other hand, when there is perverted metabolism we have various forms
of deranged action, to which we give the names of various diseases, one
of which is cancer: here in place of homologous cells maintaining the
tissues in a normal condition, we have a malignant metamorphosis into
heterologous cells, which take on a disorderly or rampant action, and
refuse to assimilate themselves to others, so as to form healthy tissue;
we have then a mass of low vitality, tending to easily break down or
ulcerate, and to extend their malignant action to adjoining tissues,
under the continued influence of a contaminated blood current. When once
ulceration has occurred, the ordinary parasitic micro-organisms, which
are practically omnipresent, find an acceptable nidus, and aid in the
destructive work, and also in the systemic poisoning of the tissues.

The aim, then to be sought in the prophylaxis of cancer is to secure the
most perfect blood stream possible, which is accomplished by simple
living, perfect mastication, and the avoidance of excesses, especially
along the lines of protein, tea and coffee, alcohol, etc., with the
maintenance of healthy habits of life, especially in regard to bowel
action. As already intimated, we do not know just why in some persons
and at a certain time a disturbance of metabolism results in perverted
cell growth, but there is, of course, a reason, and the physician’s duty
is so to regulate the patient’s whole life that the metabolism is kept
in the state of perfect health. All this seems very simple and trite,
but really it is a task which is most important and often most difficult
to accomplish, and requires very careful study and infinite patience.
Dr. Kellogg, of Battle Creek, says that of the many thousands who have
passed under his care he has not known cancer to develop in any one who
had been faithful to the principles which he inculcates, and I may say
the same of the many who have been under my care in private practice,
often with notes extending over many years.

Time does not permit of going into detail here in regard to the special
features of diet and hygiene, which I discussed with you fully two years
ago, in my lectures, which were subsequently published: suffice it to
say, as previously remarked, that the refinements of civilization add
greatly to the temptation of over-eating, and wrong eating and drinking,
as they do to numerous other temptations, and in many instances it
requires the utmost amount of grit as well as patience, both in the
patient and doctor, to secure the perfect result necessary.

It is understood, I trust, that I believe that for the proper treatment
of cancer, and to prevent its occurrence and recurrence, it is
absolutely necessary to maintain a perfect vegetarian diet, which
includes even the exclusion of eggs and milk, with food; but the yolk of
eggs may sometimes be taken with advantage, and also milk alone and
separate, at a body temperature, one hour before eating, according to
the plan which I have often demonstrated to you. As remarked in my last
lecture, the vegetable kingdom contains proteid sufficient for the
system, and the diet should be so arranged as to give the requisite
quantity of calories, in proper proportion, of vegetable protein,
carbohydrates, and fats: the latter is accomplished largely with butter,
of which a quarter of a pound may be taken daily. Many writers on diet
hold that the protein in casein acts differently from that contained in
meat, and this is allowed in many vegetarian dietaries: it also contains
phosphorus, which is an integral part of living cells, especially their
nuclei. When nutrition seems to demand it, this can, perhaps, be added
to the diet, mixed with cereals or in soups, and a small amount of
certain kinds of cheese is also sometimes allowable. It is impossible to
elaborate the details of diet fully in a lecture such as this, and I
must refer you to the many excellent works on food and nutrition
(Hutchinson, Sherman, Thompson, Buttner, Braithwaite), for further
information.

The _medical treatment of cancer_ patients is a matter which should
receive most careful and constant attention; indeed, the patient in whom
cancer is threatening or has developed should be under the watchful and
unremitting guidance of a physician who grasps the importance of the
matter and is prepared to guard the health, and to meet and correct
functional disorders as they arise; for a careful study of patients with
cancer for many years has constantly shown me gross errors in their life
and in the action of various organs, and consequently disorders of
metabolism which are of weight in connection with the disease.

The first point of importance to which I wish to call your attention is
in regard to the action of the bowels. Some of you may remember that
even that great surgeon, Sir Arbuthnot Lane, has recently emphasized the
fact that one of the terminal results of intestinal stasis may be
cancer. This may seem strange, but it would surprise you if you knew how
very commonly there was imperfect intestinal excretion, or intestinal
stasis, as it is now called, in these subjects; indeed, I might almost
say that it is the rule, and that this assuredly plays a most important
part in the auto-intoxication which leads up to cancer; in fact, I
almost feel like saying that the toxins produced by the millions of
micro-organisms generated through intestinal stasis and fecal
putrefaction are the real, incidental cause of cancer. Under a perfect
vegetarian diet there is less likelihood of trouble in this direction,
but even then there is necessity of watching continually, that there may
be at least, one, full, free movement of normal character, daily, after
breakfast. In many cancer patients I have secured this by having the
entire potato eaten, skin and all, whether boiled or baked; by this
means also one gets the full value of the inner layer of skin, which
contains the mineral salts so necessary to the economy, which are
entirely lost when the potatoes are peeled before boiling; so that
potatoes should always be cooked in their skins, even if the outer layer
is stripped off afterwards.

But the regulation of the bowel action should not be left to the
judgment and action of patients, with a spasmodic use of remedies, and
with alternate constipation and purgation; the physician himself should
carefully guide and direct the proper treatment frequently enough to
secure perfect results. Of course each one may have their own ideas and
methods, but I have long used with the best results the remedies which
you have often heard me order in this clinic. Thus, at the beginning of
treatment, and often on the same days of many succeeding weeks, I give ℞
Ext. Colocynth. Co., Mass Hydrarg ‾aa‾ gr. x Pulv. Ipecac gr. ‾ij‾ M.
Div. in Capsules No. IV. Sig. Take two at night and two on the second
night after. For continuous use, or in the nights between these, I have
long used a compound Cascarin tablet (℞ Podophylin, Aloin, Cascarin ‾aa‾
gr. ¼) one or more each night, or have depended on the Cascara in a
mixture of which I shall shortly speak. I do not like the action of
salts or laxative mineral waters in these cases, and, of course, enemata
are entirely useless to secure real, effective liver and intestinal
action, and should be used only in an emergency.

The action of the _kidneys_ is also always a very important element to
watch and control in cancer patients; this does not have reference to
albumen and casts, or glycosuria, but to a functional derangement of the
secretion: for the former are relatively infrequent compared to the
latter. This is so large a subject that time does not permit of its
elaboration; I made the matter pretty clear to you in my lectures not
long ago on the relations of diseases of the skin to internal disorders.
I must tell you, however, that, as a result of numberless studies of the
urine of many cancer patients, I have almost constantly found a
deficient or defective urinary secretion: in many cases I have had the
total daily amount accurately measured, and reported in writing each
week over long periods, and while the total quantity may at times be
near normal, the total solids sometimes fall to, and remain at, even
less than one-half the amount which should be passed for the patient’s
body weight.

I want here to urge upon you the importance and value of repeated
volumetric examination of all possible ingredients of the urine, as
indicating in the best manner obtainable the state of the arterial
blood, from which the urine is derived: especially is this true of the
exact volumetric acidity, representing the diminished alkalescence of
the blood common in cancer.

The actual medicinal and dietary treatment of the various possible
departures from normal can hardly be elaborated here, but they are along
very much the same lines which you have often watched in connection with
certain diseases of the skin; for you must remember that carcinoma is an
epithelial disease, and that the laws of nutrition are much the same for
this as for various other morbid conditions of the economy. I may say,
however, that very many of my cancer patients have received the greatest
benefit from acetate of potassa, often in the formula familiar to you (℞
Potass. Acetatis ℥i Tinct. Nucis Vomic ʒiv Extr. Cascar. fld. ʒ‾ij‾-ʒiv
Extr. Rumicis radicis fld. ad ℥iv M. Sig. One teaspoonful half an hour
before eating, well diluted). For many years I have administered potassa
largely to these patients, and it is gratifying to find not only support
but an incentive to its greater use, in the studies and experience of
Ross, who pushes it to a very great extent, giving as high as 240 grains
of potassium phosphate in a day. Ross also advises the free use of crude
or brown sugar, as it contains a large proportion of potassium salts,
which are for the most part removed from the white or refined article. I
must also remind you of the great value of Bethesda water, in washing
out the kidneys, given a tumblerful with each meal, and one tumblerful,
hot, one hour before breakfast and also an hour before the evening meal.

The _blood_ should also be watched, and in my hospital cases I have a
count made every week; for the hæmoglobin content, and the number of the
erythrocytes, and the percentage of the varieties of leucocytes afford
very valuable information as to the physical state of the patient, and
the progress or recession of the cancer, and in a measure these data are
of value in directing therapy. I have also the _weight_ of the patient
taken and recorded each week, as a guide to nutrition and dietary
matters. Also the _saliva_ is tested and recorded before and after each
meal, and furnishes an indication in regard to the administration of
alkalies.

Iron is found to be greatly wanting in the blood and tissues late in
cancer, and should always be an element in the treatment of this
disease. Skene Keith, noticing that after a cancerous mass was removed
the blood recovered in regard to hæmoglobin and erythrocytes,
administered iron with arsenic, with the greatest benefit, the growth
shriveling up and the patient gaining in weight; he recommends the
citrate of iron and ammonia, the preparation which I have given to
patients for many years past. He also advises hypodermic injections of
iron, arsenic, and soda, and reports cases thus treated, some of them
with good results. There is a loss of phosphates in these patients, and
phosphate of iron or other phosphates are valuable.

When considering the metabolism of cancer mention was made of
derangement in the action of the ductless glands in this disease, and of
the use and value of certain preparations of the internal secretions in
its treatment. While a hormone therapy of cancer is still in its
infancy, in spite of many books and innumerable journal articles on the
internal secretions, it is quite possible that the future may
demonstrate its efficacy in helping to control the disease: for, that
the latter are efficient agents in carrying on the vital processes in
the body, there can be no question, although as Biedl remarks, “Our
knowledge of the chemistry of hormone formation is very slight.”

But considerable clinical evidence has been accumulated that one at
least of the internal secretions, namely, that of the _thyroid_, has a
definite beneficial effect upon cancer; this I have administered to many
cancer patients, and have reason to believe that it contributed to the
favorable results obtained. Sajous, believing that insufficiency of the
adrenal secretion is an element in altered nutrition, advocates thyroid
extract on the ground that it stimulates the activity of the adrenals:
Vincent quotes Erlich as believing that “there may be substances
circulating in the organism which may stimulate the body cells to resist
the athreptic influence of cancer cells.” Shirlaw advises a tablet made
of thyroid 6 grains, supra-renal ¾ grain, and pituitary 1/16 grain.
While the treatment by these hormones from internal secretions is really
in rather an experimental stage, it would seem more than probable that
the correct use of these pluriglandular extracts, in combination with
other proper dietary and medicinal treatment, would be of service in the
prophylaxis and treatment of cancer. I have been a little cautious in
the use of thyroid, beginning with two or three grains with meals, three
times daily; for, as a promoter of catabolism it can disintegrate tissue
faster than the emunctories can remove the effete products, and may thus
poison the system.

Serum- and Vaccine-therapy are yet in a stage of development, and as I
have had little or no personal experience with them I will not attempt
to discuss their value, which time alone will demonstrate. While there
have been many claims of success from treatment along these lines,
unfortunately they have not been confirmed by later observations by
others: I may say frankly that they have never appealed to me as
rational, in consideration of the views and experience I have long had
along other lines of thought and practice. If, however, future
investigations shall confirm some of the remarkable reports which have
been made, the latest of which is by Nowell, there may be opened a
non-surgical line of treatment of cancer which would mean much to many
otherwise hopeless cases.

The _local medical treatment_ of cancer is also an important matter
which should receive careful attention. For many years in early cancer
of the breast, under proper, general, dietetic, hygienic, and medicinal
treatment, I have seen the lump vanish under the continued application
of the iodide of lead, in Hebra’s diachylon ointment of the German
Pharmacopœia (ʒss-ʒi ad ℥i), and in very many instances I have had the
assurance of patients that its application relieved the pain and was of
the greatest benefit also in axillary and other metastases. In other
cases the continuous painting with ichthyol (50 p.c. in water) has
seemed to be of great service, in combination with other proper
treatment: all of this in earlier cases, before ulceration has occurred.

After ulceration has set in, either in primary or recurrent cases,
proper local medication is very important. The ordinary micro-organisms,
finding a suitable nidus, very readily germinate and add greatly to the
suppuration, and consequent exhaustion and pain, and by their toxins,
aid also in the general contamination of the blood and tissues. Hydrogen
peroxide, laid on with pledgets of absorbent cotton is often of great
service in changing the conditions of the part, and when followed by
Russian oil, also applied with cotton, makes a most satisfactory
dressing. Adrenalin 1‒1000 is also often of service, both in checking
active hemorrhage, and in relieving pain, and shrinking up the
granulations. Ichthyol, 10 to 25 per cent. in water, and permanganate of
potash in water, 1 to 2 per cent., are also often of service, likewise
acetate of aluminium, 3 to 5 per cent.: methylin blue and fuchsin in
watery solution, 1 to 2 per cent. were formerly much used, and often
served a good purpose. It is understood, however, that none of these
measures have any great curative effect on cancer, but as contributory
elements they should never be neglected. Ichthyol ointment (℞ Ichthyol
ʒss-ʒi Zinc Oxid ʒss Unguent. Aquæ Rosæ ℥i) often proves most
satisfactory, spread on thin layers of absorbent cotton, and changed
several times daily, after soaking the part with one of the liquids
above mentioned.

Time does not permit us to go into the matter of the X-ray, which
undoubtedly has often been of great service in certain cases of cancer:
it should be carefully but systematically employed, once or twice a week
in connection with other medical treatment; radium can also be of real
service in these cases. In some inoperable cases a mild surgery,
especially with the actual cautery, in the way of removing exuberant
masses, which would have to slough off, can add much to the good
progress of the case, and the occasional excision of cutaneous nodules
removes just so much cancerous tissue, which by its secretion would
poison the system.

In our study thus far we have seen that there is much to be done for
cancer besides the surgical removal of the offending mass, the existence
of which is an opprobrium to medical science, which has not thus far
guarded mankind against it: and until time has passed, and by right
living and proper medical attention cancer has ceased to be produced, or
become greatly diminished, surgery will probably be a great factor in
its treatment, as its mortality statistics are constantly improving. But
there can be no question but that with the adoption of proper dietary
and medical treatment, even from the first suspicion of a malignant
growth, and before, as also after operation, the final results of
operative procedure will be even far better than have been yet attained.




                               LECTURE VI
                CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS


The test of everything lies in the results obtained. Theories,
discussions, and arguments are all unavailing unless results show their
truth. In medicine, however, it is sometimes difficult to demonstrate
results until after the lapse of time, as was well illustrated by the
preposterous claims first put forth for “606,” which is gradually
attaining about its correct status. The same is true in regard to the
surgery of carcinoma, where operations which formerly were attended with
very bad results have gradually been improved, so that, while the late
Dr. Agnew of Philadelphia once said, toward the close of his life, that
he did not know if he had ever been justified in any operation he had
performed on this disease, the best surgeons are now claiming notable
successes, with relatively good percentages of recovery: but here again,
time comes in, and while the three-year limit of freedom from recurrence
is valuable, it is still said that fully 90 per cent. of those who have
once been affected with true cancer, die of the disease, and its general
mortality is still increasing in spite of all surgery. Dr. John B.
Murphy of Chicago, has also repeatedly expressed himself most
pessimistically in regard to the ultimate results of the surgical
treatment of carcinoma, especially in those patients who are fat, and
with lax tissue, that is, exhibiting evidences of imperfect metabolism.

Dietetic and medical treatment of cancer, in the fullest sense, have
never yet been given a fair and fully intelligent trial on a scale large
enough to produce general conviction in regard to their value. Many
cases have occurred here and there which have recovered spontaneously,
that is, without surgical interference, and often really to the surprise
of the medical attendant: this of itself shows that under certain
circumstances something may occur in the system which causes the
malignant process to cease, and the cells to return to a normal
function. This certainly should be a stimulus to discover what the
reason is for this beneficial change, and we believe that it is to be
found in what has preceded in these lectures.

When the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital was founded, over thirty
years ago, Cancer was included with Diseases of the Skin, in the hope
and expectation that in studying the internal causes of the latter light
would be thrown on the etiology of carcinoma, which, as we know, is a
disease of epithelial elements; and the earlier Report of the Hospital
shows but one department, including Cancer with Skin Diseases, with
operating surgeons and a gynæcologist to assist, whenever their services
were requested by the physicians in charge. Before long, however, for
reasons which cannot now be given, and against the judgment of the
present speaker, the plan was changed, and a separate cancer department
was erected under the exclusive charge of surgeons. A Prize Fund was
also early established, which has been slowly increasing, for the
discovery of a cure for cancer by other than surgical removal.

For thirty or forty years I have held very much the same views regarding
cancer which have been presented in these lectures, and have acted on
them more or less strongly, and in later years very stringently, and
have rarely seen cause for regret. For one reason or another I have also
had many hundreds of patients, with various affections, on a vegetarian
diet over varying periods: in a number of cases I have records extending
over many years, in which I have observed the patients from time to time
(one psoriasis patient having continued it for over twenty years) and
with only the best results, so I trust that you will accept and test the
validity of my statements.

In looking over my case histories in private practice I find that I have
more or less complete records of 96 cases of carcinoma, mostly of the
breast (two of them having Paget’s disease), 29 of sarcoma in various
situations, and 619 of epithelioma of different degrees of severity, of
which four others had Paget’s disease; a total of 744 patients with
these forms of neoplasm. Some of these patients were seen in
consultation, others only once or for a brief period, but many of them
were under care and observation for a greater or less length of time.
During the past year I have also treated on the plan here indicated a
number of cases of recurrent carcinoma in the New York Skin and Cancer
Hospital, which have been submitted to very careful laboratory study,
some of whom have exhibited decidedly favorable results: some of these
will be referred to later, but they are too recent to afford positive
data, and I prefer to confine my consideration mainly to private
patients, in regard to whom more reliable evidence can be obtained.

I will not weary you with any full analysis of these cases, nor will I
consider any of them except those of carcinoma: for while I believe that
sarcoma is of the same nature and origin, save that it relates to
connective tissue cells, but few of the cases were submitted long enough
to a vigorous treatment calculated to yield efficient results. I may say
in regard to the cases of epithelioma, mainly of the skin, that some of
the more severe ones showed very markedly the benefit of dietetic and
medicinal measures of the character now being considered, and that it is
my custom to treat such in the same manner; for reason would seem to
show that the same causes would produce abnormal proliferation of
epithelial elements on the cutaneous surface as well as in other parts
of the body.

In regard to the cases of carcinoma there were 6 in males and 90 in
females; of these the right breast was affected 42 times, the left
breast 45 times, and both breasts 3 times. In 28 cases the patients were
operated on surgically before adequate treatment had been employed; many
of these were earlier cases, or those seen in consultation. In seven
instances it seemed wise to have an operation, after a more or less
faithful trial of medical treatment. There were no cases of cancer of
internal organs, except metastases, as these would not naturally come to
me. The average age of the breast cases was 51.8 years.

In the large majority of cases, except those who had been surgically
operated on, the diagnosis was clinical only, as it is an accepted fact
that it is very unwise to make a biopsy, even before surgical removal,
and manifestly improper where this is not undertaken; but in most of the
cases there was the independent diagnosis of one or more other medical
men, and many of the patients came to me on account of threatened
operations by prominent surgeons, and even after these had been arranged
for; in 27 cases there had been previous surgical removal with
recurrence, and in several cases more than one operation, with again
recurrence.

The exact duration of cancer before coming under observation is always
an uncertain item, for undoubtedly a tumor starts in an individual cell
or group of cells, and has probably been forming some time before being
noticed by the patient or attracting attention in any way. The average
stated duration of the disease was 1.6 years before coming under
observation.

Surgeons are fully agreed that the earlier a tumor is recognized and
removed the better the prospect of ultimate success, and this is
eminently true in regard to remedial measures other than surgical: for
as we have seen, after a cancerous process is well under way its cells
secrete a something which hastens the general depravement of the system,
and quickens the growth of the neoplasm, and naturally greatly increases
the difficulty of overcoming the dyscrasia.

Thus in the effort to get at and remove all possible or prospective
cancerous lesions, many innocent or non-malignant adenomata, etc., are
operated on, which are afterwards found to be such microscopically. In
the same way it is quite possible that some of the small breast tumors
which have disappeared under the dietetic and medical measures here
described were still non-malignant, and should not be grouped with
carcinoma.

It is fair to say, therefore, that among my notes are also 22 cases of
breast tumors which have been excluded from the carcinoma list, and
entered with other titles, such as abscess, cyst, chronic mastitis,
adenoma, etc. But I claim that even if some of these also disappear
under the measures we are considering, as they frequently have done, it
is a better and more desirable result than if they had been removed by
the knife: for in the former case the cause which induced the unnatural
growth has been overcome, whereas by surgery only the obnoxious mass has
been dislodged, and perhaps with it adjoining tissue and glands, but
nothing has been accomplished toward checking the cause producing the
offending lesion. But the very fact of the frequent recurrences after
operation, in the neighboring skin or elsewhere, demonstrates the fact
that surgery is but an attempt to rectify past errors, which might or
might not have been prevented by careful medical foresight and action;
we must, however, be thankful for the measure of success which has
followed the noble efforts of our distinguished surgeons, only it is to
be hoped that hereafter other measures will also be more commonly
adopted, looking towards a prevention of the recurrence of carcinoma
after operation.

Not to detain you too long with these clinical considerations, I would
like to give the details of a few of the cases which have been most
striking.

Mrs. B. E. C., aged 44, was first seen on account of trouble in the
right breast, on September 19, 1892. She then had a flat tumor in the
outer lower segment, an inch and a half in diameter, rather sharply
defined, and tender on pressure at the sides, which she had noticed
about two months. Not satisfied with the diagnosis of cancer, and
hesitating at the thought of medical treatment, she consulted a well
known, prominent surgeon, who pronounced the tumor as undoubtedly
cancer, and urged its instant removal; this I did not know until she
informed me of it some time later, after the tumor had entirely
disappeared under treatment. I saw her at frequent intervals for six
months, and the breast became entirely normal. Four years later she was
again seen in regard to the menopause, which she was undergoing, and the
breast was found still to be normal: she was maintaining her diet.
Nearly three years later I learned from her husband that she was in
perfect health, with absolutely no breast trouble, and for eight years
later, while he himself was under occasional treatment, I learned
repeatedly that she remained still perfectly well, over sixteen years
after beginning treatment, with no recurrence of the breast tumor.

Miss B. M. L., aged 45, was first seen on January 4, 1894, with a tumor
in the left breast, which had been diagnosed as cancer by three medical
men, and one of them, a surgeon of prominence, had arranged for
immediate surgical removal the next day. The mass was situated in the
upper and outer quadrant, well defined, not painful on moderate
handling, but subsequently she experienced pain in it. Two months later
the lump was recorded as less distinct and flatter, and within eleven
months it had entirely disappeared. A month or two later she had some
pain in the breast, in connection with the menstrual disturbance
accompanying the menopause, but no trace of the tumor. On Nov. 8th,
1905, she called, bringing a relative for treatment, and the breast was
found perfectly normal, and again five years later she called, with
another trouble, the breast still remaining perfectly well, also sixteen
years after first coming under treatment.

Miss J. M. A., aged 45, was first seen October 12th, 1905, with a tumor
of the left breast, above, toward the median line, near the nipple, not
painful on handling, though there was some pain afterwards, and it had
been awaking her with pain at night for some months, with also a numb,
shooting pain in the daytime. She had seen a number of medical men
always with the diagnosis of cancer, but she had declined operation. Two
months later, Dec. 15th, 1905, it was recorded that there was very
little to be felt in the breast, and there was no pain at any time, and
on January 5th, 1906, both breasts were the same on palpation, with no
sign of the former tumor. For one reason or another she has been seen
from time to time, almost up to the present date, and remains perfectly
free from her former trouble, a period of over nine years. She has been
a most faithful patient, adhering strictly to diet and more or less
medication, except when on certain occasions I have let up on the same;
and all the time from the first she has been under great strain of work,
mental and physical, as a city missionary.

Another very similar case was in the person of Miss G. M., aged 44, who
has been under constant observation and treatment off and on for various
troubles from November 13, 1905, until yesterday. Fifteen years previous
to her first visit she had fallen and struck the left breast which was
bruised, but the effects wore off in some months, and there was no
sensation in the breast for some years. Then 7 or 8 years later she
began to have pain in the breast, aggravated before and during
menstruation, which had continued until her visit, and for the last
months she had been kept from her work in school, the pain being severe
in the breast, and more recently in the axilla: in July there had been
bleeding from the nipple. She had seen a number of medical men, with the
diagnosis of cancer, and one surgeon of prominence in one of the large
hospitals had strongly pressed for an immediate operation.

When first seen there was a tumor between two and three inches in
diameter, in the upper, inner segment of the left breast, hard, sharply
defined, and more or less nodular on the surface: there were some
enlarged glands in the left axilla. She had long been constipated and
was passing about 60 per cent. of the amount of urinary solids proper
for her weight. Under very active treatment it was recorded four weeks
later that there had been hardly any sensations in the breast during the
previous week, that the tumor had diminished materially in size, with
only moderate hardness, and that she was now out doors every day, and
feeling much better. One month later it was recorded that the breast was
very well and on examination was almost the same as the other, there
being some general caking in both: she had had no pain for some time.
One month or so later she was again at her duties as a public school
teacher, which she has continued at since, with rare exceptions, when
some temporary ailment prevented: the lump in the breast did not wholly
disappear for a month or two later, but on April 7th it was recorded
that the left breast was the same as the other, and no glands could be
felt in the axilla.

From that time to the present she has had a variety of troubles,
rheumatic and other, and it has been difficult to keep up a proper
action of the bowels and kidneys; but in spite of strenuous and often
exhausting work as a New York City public school teacher, she has had no
return of the breast trouble, now for over nine years. A sister, aged
60, has just died with cancer of the stomach in a distant country town.

I could multiply these histories but do not want to tire you, though I
do want to mention one more patient, to show what can be done in the
case of recurrent carcinoma, after operation, of which I have had a
number of cases with varying results, according to the duration and
severity of the disease.

Miss H. M., aged 61, came to me June 21st, 1913, with the following
history: About two years previously a lump appeared in the outer, lower
segment of the left breast, which was removed in August, 1911; this
healed soon, leaving a good axillary scar, and there was no thought of
trouble until two months before her visit, when a small red spot
appeared near the edge of the sternum. This enlarged and hardened and
others appeared around the scar, until, when seen there were a dozen red
nodules up to half an inch in diameter, near the center of the former
site of the breast, with others, not red, above; with the tense skin and
rapidly developing, multiple nodules here and there, further surgical
operative procedure was out of the question.

Since that date she has been under strict vegetarian diet and
medication, including thyroid from time to time, with repeated
application of X-rays, and under all these measures together many of the
nodules have disappeared; although some new ones have formed, several of
which have been removed under local anæsthesia, the wounds healing
kindly. As she resides some distance from the city she has not been seen
since October 7th, 1914, she wishing to take the X-rays nearer home, but
she was earnestly charged to continue also the dietetic and other
treatment. In this instance the patient has lived comfortably and
without pain for almost sixteen months after coming under treatment,
and, although she has lost some flesh, the active cancerous process,
which would otherwise have carried her off long ago, has been in a
measure checked. What will be the further history of the case one cannot
tell, for it is quite possible that being away from my care she may
neglect dietetic and medicinal treatment, trusting only to the X-rays,
which, of course, cannot influence the real nature and course of the
disease.

Reference was made to certain cases of recurrent cancer in the Hospital
which had been under active medical treatment during the past year, with
careful laboratory studies, but it is naturally too early to report
anything very definite in regard to them, especially as most of them
were desperate cases, which had advanced far beyond any possible
operative relief. Moreover several of them remained but a short time
under treatment, as it is very difficult to convince this class of
patients that any possible benefit can accrue from anything but an
operation, and this being impossible they often give up and leave,
preferring to die at home; moreover the dietary restraint seems also
very irksome and useless to them and their friends. In one particular
patient, however, there was such a remarkable improvement that it is
worth reporting to you.

Mrs. C. M. was first seen February 12th, 1914. Nineteen years previously
she had an abscess of the right breast, which healed and left a tumor
the size of a pigeon’s egg in the inner, upper quadrant of the breast;
this remained quiescent until it began to enlarge, eleven months before
it was removed at the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, November 14th,
1912. The tumor was then about the size of a hen’s egg, with an area of
skin the size of a quarter, attached to it: a second tumor was felt just
below the nipple, which was not retracted, and the axillary glands were
involved: there were no signs of metastases in the abdomen. A complete
operation was then performed, with dissection of the glands in the
axillary and supra-clavicular regions, and she was discharged January
16th, 1913.

On February 9th, 1914, she returned to the Hospital and was placed under
medical treatment, with vegetarian diet. There was then an ulceration
along the line of incision, from the second to the fourth rib, with many
nodules around it, averaging a third of an inch in diameter, raised and
reddened. The liver extended two inches below the edge of the ribs, with
a hard and nodular margin; the right arm was enormously swollen and
helpless. When she left the Hospital, June 20th, 1914, the ulcer had
entirely closed, many of the cutaneous nodules had entirely disappeared,
the arm had returned to normal size, like the other, by measurement, and
the liver had retracted to a trifle below the margin of the ribs, with
hardly any nodules to be felt. The treatment had included twenty-five
X-ray exposures, from 8 to 10 minutes each, about twice a week, over
three areas each time.

While in the Hospital careful laboratory investigations were made,
according to a definite schedule. The _blood_, studied weekly,
maintained a hæmoglobin of 80+ for over two months, then fell a little,
and again rose. The erythrocytes were 3,262,000 on entering, and rose
within two months to 4,282,000, then fell a little and rose again to
almost 4,000,000: the leucocytes were 9,000 on entering, and fell to
5,200 just before leaving, the poly-nuclear 69 per cent. on admission,
fell to 60 per cent., and again rose a little, and the proportion of the
other forms remained about normal. The _urine_, volumetrically analyzed
every three days, was kept a little below the normal acidity, and the
specific gravity a little low, with a free daily amount of excretion,
largely by Bethesda water: in spite of the vegetarian diet the urea
excretion was not much below normal, and sometimes above, the chlorides
were diminished, owing to the rather small amount of food taken, the
phosphates varied a little above and below normal, there was never any
indican, and the sulphates averaged a trifle below normal. The _saliva_,
tested before and after each meal, was acid at first, but became neutral
and alkaline off and on. The _weight_, taken weekly, fell a little from
the first, but maintained a good level, and rose a little before she
left the Hospital.

This was a very difficult patient to manage, as she was a very ignorant
Polish woman, who often rebelled at the diet, and wearied of the routine
and restrictions imposed; she left the Hospital June 20th, 1914, against
my wish, but with as great a change in her physical condition and
disease as could be imagined, after about four months and a half
treatment, carried out under disadvantageous circumstances.

One other case, seen recently, where the disease was recurrent after
three operations, deserves mention, although it will be some time before
any decisive result can be reported.

Mrs. W. C., aged 45, was first seen September 17th, 1914. Nearly four
years previously she had noticed a lump in the left breast which was
removed on January 6th, 1911, but it soon regrew, and a complete
operation was performed at the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, May
30th, 1911. Two years later there was some return, and she was again
operated on at the Hospital, May 30th, 1914. About two months before her
first visit, September 17th, 1914, a swelling of the sternum was
noticed, and soon another above it, both of which increased pretty
rapidly to the time of her visit. When seen there was a hard mass in the
scar over the sternum, about an inch and a half long, raised a quarter
of an inch or so, reddened and immovable: an inch or so above it was
another, smaller one, not reddened: they were not particularly painful
on moderate handling, but painful when at hard housework. When last
seen, December 7th, both lumps had subsided fully one-half, there was no
pain at any time, and her general condition had improved immensely, she
feeling better than she did four or five years ago, that is, before the
beginning of the cancerous development: she has been working all the
time, unusually hard, as janitor of four buildings and also going out
scrubbing and washing. She weighed 157¼ pounds when first seen, then ran
down to 154, but is again gaining, being 155½ at her last visit. The
outcome of this case it is, of course, impossible to conjecture, for one
can seldom be sure that patients will be absolutely faithful to
treatment, for a long enough time, but certainly the change in the woman
and in the lesions in this two months and a half has been remarkable,
compared with the increasing development of the disease in the two
months previous.

I must mention one more case, which, although fatal, exhibited some of
the good results of careful medical treatment even when a primary case
had advanced far beyond the possible aid of surgery.

Mrs. M. B. J., aged 68, a private patient, was first seen on February
17th, 1914. Two years previously she noticed a lump in the upper part of
the right breast, after great and repeated mental distress from the
death of a number of very near relatives, and a sister’s mental
derangement; the great nervous strain had been attended with various
bilious attacks and nervous indigestion. The mass increased steadily in
size and was kept concealed even from her family, until the day before
she called, when her family physician who was consulted saw that it was
far beyond the possible hope from any operation, in which view a surgeon
concurred.

When seen the whole breast was involved, was double the size of the
other, hard, immovable, and with an adherent crust over an ulcerating
surface on its lower half, several inches in diameter, from beneath
which was a moderate discharge: the axillary glands were enormously
enlarged, as also the supra-clavicular, and she was strongly cachectic.
She was placed on an absolute vegetarian diet, with no coffee or tea,
and appropriate medical treatment, and the breast kept painted with
fifty per cent. ichthyol and water, care being taken not to disturb the
adherent crust. In a very short time the discharge ceased, and the
protective crust adhered until her death from exhaustion, with pulmonary
œdema, on September 9th, 1914. On August 15th it was recorded that the
breast had done very well, that it was soft and movable, and not larger
than the other breast, with no discharge, and no pain since a short time
after beginning treatment: the axillary glands had diminished
three-quarters in size, and the supra-clavicular glands were also very
much smaller.

And now, gentlemen, my task is done. I have tried to let you see cancer
through my spectacles, as I have seen it for very many years past, and
to share with me my optimism in regard to the prophylaxis and cure of
cancer, if only there can be sufficient enlightenment in the profession
and public: and I must tell you that in collating and preparing the
material to support my long held views I have expended very much more
time and labor in study, for some months past, than I could have
believed possible. But as the subject developed, and as I discovered
more and more support for my thesis, there was a fascination about the
work which I could not resist; and if I have tried you with the many
details of proof presented I beg that you will pardon me: for I wanted
to present the subject so strongly that my hearers, at least, would
accept the propositions I have developed, and believe what I have said
in regard to my own experience with the terrible disease under
consideration, and act upon both, and thus aid some sufferers with
cancer.

From my recent article on “The Relation of Diet to Cancer” many medical
journals have quoted me as ascribing the disease wholly to the use of
meat, but you who have heard these lectures now know that animal
proteids are only one of the contributing causes.

I have tried to make it plain that metabolic errors, inducing a vitiated
blood stream, are the basic cause of the aberrant action in the cellular
elements of the body which may ultimately lead to malignant disease; and
I have tried to show that there are many elements connected with modern
so-called civilization which conspire to effect this end. I have quoted
many who were well acquainted with cancer, who believed that luxurious
living, which includes much animal food, coffee and tea, and alcohol,
with indolence or want of sufficient muscular activity to burn up the
waste products, and the persistent neglect of hygienic laws, should be
placed first among the causes of cancer: but I have also mentioned that
the refining and preparation and cooking of food prevented a proper
supply of the mineral and other elements of nutrition, and also that
nervous influences could so disturb the action of the organs of the body
that they could not perform their functions perfectly in the elaboration
of nutritive material, etc.

But I cannot go over again all the matter already given in these
lectures, and only mention these to remind you that there is no one
single cause of cancer, and consequently that its prophylaxis and cure
can never be found in any one single remedy; hence I can never believe
in the sole use of thyroid, much less in the idea that sero-therapy can
overcome a disease dependent upon the continued operation of so many
causes; and still less can I believe that the mere cutting out of an
already diseased portion of the body is the proper and only means of
overcoming such a malady as cancer.

I have acknowledged that local irritation of many kinds may be the
proximate cause for the development of a malignant tumor in any
particular locality, as Ewing has so clearly shown in his excellent
resumé on pre-cancerous lesions; but I have also contended that we
should withal look into and overcome the cause; why, when once started
by local injury the cells should pursue such a progressive, aggressive,
and invasive course; and this is found, I believe, in the disturbed
character of the fluids which provide them with nourishment for their
abnormal growth.

From this study of cancer in regard to its nature, frequency,
geographical distribution, metabolism, dietetic relations, medical
treatment, and clinical considerations, what conclusions can be drawn?
Have we solved the problem of cancer? Far be it from us to make any such
claim. Scientific research and study must still go on in the laboratory,
but clinical research and study, with laboratory work, on the human
subject, which have not been hitherto sufficiently cultivated, should be
pushed, so that by a mass of carefully recorded observations the truth
or falsity of what has been here quoted and said may be refuted or
confirmed.

From the enormous work which has been done on cancer with the microscope
and the test tube, it would seem sometimes that research workers have
become somewhat myopic, and not farsighted enough to recognize the true
value of statistical studies and clinical observations. In these
lectures we have attempted to make a brief synthetic study of some of
the work which has been done in connection with cancer, and from this we
believe that certain conclusions can be drawn; if these are correct and
followed, it is hoped that much more can be accomplished in regard to
the prophylaxis and cure of this more than threatening, fatal malady. In
order that you may hold clearly the points which have been made I want
to give you a synopsis or conclusions of them, as they have been brought
out in this and preceding lectures.

1. Cancer is but a deviation from the normal life and action of certain
of the ordinary cells of the body, which, for some as yet unexplained
reason, take on an abnormal or morbid action; with this there is a
continued tendency to a malignancy which invades contiguous tissue, and
in the end tends to destroy life.

2. There is some reason to believe that this action first takes place in
what are known as “embryonic rests,” or pre-natal, wrongly placed tissue
elements, which, however, are now shown to exist in every one, in many
localities: but the reason why they take on this malignant action, and
form cancer, has not been satisfactorily explained.

3. Cancer is _not_ wholly due to traumatic causes, although those play a
not inconsiderable part in its occurrence in certain localities and
cases.

4. It is pretty conclusively decided that cancer is _not_ caused by a
micro-organism, or parasite.

5. It is also known clinically and experimentally that it is _not_
contagious.

6. _Nor_ is it hereditary in any appreciable degree.

7. Occupation has _not_ any very great influence on the occurrence of
cancer, although it is more frequent in some pursuits than in others.

8. Cancer is _not_ altogether a disease of older age, although its
incidence is greatly increased with advancing years.

9. It does _not_ especially belong to or affect any particular sex,
race, or class of persons.

10. It is _not_ confined to any location or section of the earth, but
has been observed in all countries and climates.

11. No single cause of cancer has yet been demonstrated, nor is it
likely that this will ever be the case, as the experimental and other
investigations have covered almost every possible line of research, with
only _negative_ results.

12. The exclusion of almost every other possible cause of cancer, as
well as its pathological history, leads to deranged metabolism as the
only remaining possible etiological element; this acts by inducing
changes in nutrition, which latter depends on diet and the proper action
of the secretory and excretory organs, which, still further, may be
affected by nervous influences.

13. While the bio-chemistry of cancer throws little light on its true
nature, enough is known to show that the morbid changes in the cells are
largely associated with deranged metabolism.

14. The blood, in advancing cancer, manifests changes which indicate
vital alteration in the action of the organs which form blood and
control the nutrition of the body and its cells.

15. Clinical and experimental evidence demonstrate that the secretions
and excretions of the body exhibit departures from normal, which, while
not pathognomonic of cancer, indicate metabolic disturbances involving
the nutrition of the cellular elements, which disturbances are of
importance.

16. The evidence seems certain that the cancer mass itself, when fully
developed, secretes a poison which tends to augment its own growth and
hastens the lethal progress of the disease.

17. Cancer mortality is undoubtedly on the increase in every portion on
the globe.

18. This increase seems to vary inversely with the decline of
tuberculosis, in many localities.

19. The incidence of cancer seems to follow closely along the lines of
modern civilization.

20. This extension of cancer seems to depend largely upon the altered
conditions of life, particularly along the lines of self-indulgence in
eating and drinking, and indolence.

21. The augmentation in the consumption of meat, coffee and alcoholic
beverages appears to be coincident with a very great, and
proportionately greater, augmentation of the mortality from cancer.

22. The nerve strain of modern life seems to be an element of
importance, both through disturbance of metabolism, and by direct action
on morbidly deranged cells.

23. No single remedy for cancer will probably ever be discovered, since
it is conceded that there is no single cause for the disease.

24. Surgery has improved materially the statistics relating to the
mortality of operative cases; but the total achievements along this line
are insignificant compared with the general ultimate mortality of over
90 per cent. of those once afflicted with cancer.

25. Surgery has had, and may long have its function to perform in
removing the products of the disease, more or less efficiently, curing
some and prolonging the life of others, but it can never hope to lessen
greatly the morbidity of cancer.

26. The X-ray and radium, as also caustics, are in the same position as
surgery, and can do relatively little more than cause to disappear
lesions which have developed from causes which they cannot reach.

27. With all these means the measure of success, aside from the
technical skill of the operator, largely depends on the time or period
of development of the malignant tumor before treatment; the earlier the
removal is undertaken, other things being equal, the greater the
possibilities of success.

28. The same is true in regard to the treatment of the disease by means
other than those mentioned: the earlier the morbid process leading to
tumor formation is attacked by dietetic, hygienic, and medicinal
measures, the greater the promise and expectation of success, present
and permanent.

29. The prevention of cancer, therefore, or the checking of its
increasing occurrence, depends largely upon the early enough adoption of
such measures as will limit the agencies which induce a derangement of
the body juices which tend to bad nutrition and derangement of the body
cells.

30. The simple life, with the avoidance of the dietetic and other causes
which have been found to induce cancer in nations and individuals,
promises the best hope for the arrest of the rapidly increasing
development of cancer throughout the world.

31. It is more than possible, however, that the long continued operation
of many baneful causes has produced such a degeneration of tissue in the
human race, that it will take a generation or more of proper living to
make the beneficial impression on the general incidence of cancer which
is so longed for.




                            BIBLIOGRAPHY[2]


  1. ABDERHALDEN—Defensive Ferments. New York, 1914.

  2. ABERNETHY—Surgical Observations on Tumors. Lond., 1816, 221.

  3. BAINBRIDGE—_Medical Record_, 1909, LXXVI, 85.

  4. BAINBRIDGE—The Cancer Problem. New York, 1914.

  5. BANKS—_Lancet_, 1900, I, 684.

  6. BEARD—The Enzyme Treatment of Cancer. Lond., 1911.

  7. BEEBE—_New York Medical Journal_, 1910, LXXXII, 1058.

  8. BELL—Cancer: Its Causation and Its Curability Without Operation.
       London, 1903.

  9. BENEKE—_Berl. Klin. Wochenschr._, March 15, 1880.

 10. BENRATT—_Indian Med. Gaz._, 1908, XLIII, 452.

 11. BIEDL—The Internal Secretory Organs. New York, 1913.

 12. BLUMENTHAL—Handb. d. Spezial Pathol. d. Harns., 1913, 263.

 13. BRAITHWAITE—_Lancet_, 1902, I, 400.

 14. BRAITHWAITE—Plainer Food and Less of It. London, 1908.

 15. BRISTOL—_Medical Record_, 1913, LXXXIII, 787.

 16. BULKLEY—Relations of Diseases of the Skin to Internal Disorders.
       New York, 1906.

 17. BULKLEY—Some Problems in Metabolism, _Jour. Cutan. Dis._, 1911,
       XXIX, 217.

 18. BULKLEY—Diet and Hygiene in Diseases of the Skin. New York, 1913.

 19. Bureau of Agriculture, 28th Annual Rep. Washington, 1911.

 20. BURNHAM—Hæmocytes and Hæmic Infections, 1913; 92; 138.

 21. BUTTNER—A Fleshless Diet. New York, 1910.

 22. CAHEN—_Deut. Zeitschr. f. Chir._, 1909, CXIX, 415.

 23. CHITTENDEN—Physiological Economy in Nutrition, 1904.

 24. COHNREICH—Folia Hæmatologica, 1913, XVI, 307.

 25. COOPER, SIR ASTLEY—Lectures on Surgery, Boston, 1825.

 26. DE BLOEME, SWART, and TERWEN—_Munch. Med. Wochenschr._, 1914, LXI,
       1718.

 27. DEGREZ—_Gaz. Med. de Paris_, 1913, LXXXIV, 400.

 28. EINHORN, KAHN and ROSENBLUM—_Arch. f. Verdauungskr._, 1911, XVII,
       557.

 29. EWING—Cancer Problems, Report of the C. P. Huntington Fund for
       Cancer Research, Vol. II, 1908.

 30. EWING—_Medical Record_, 1914, LXXXVI, 951.

 31. GRUNER—Biology of the Blood Cells, 1913, 153; 260.

 32. GWYER—_Ann. of Surgery_, 1907, XXXXVI, 86; 643, 1908, XXXXVII, 506;
       631.

 33. HAIG—Uric Acid as a Factor in the Causation of Diseases. Phila.,
       1908, 420.

 34. HAIG—_Brit. Med. Jour._, 1912, II, 81.

 35. HARROWER—Practical Hormone Therapy, 1914, 29.

 36. HISLOP AND FENWICK—_Brit. Med. Jour._, 1909, II, 1222.

 37. HUTCHINSON—Food and Dietetics. New York, 1911, 324.

 38. ISENBERG—_Monotschr. f. prakt. Wasserheilk_, 1910, XVII.

 39. JANEWAY—_Sajous’ Anal. Cyclopedia of Pract. Med._, 1912, II, 753.

 40. JOHNSON—_Brit. Med. Jour._, 1900, II, 982.

 41. JONES—_Arch. Middlesex Hosp._, London, 1911, XXIII, 72.

 42. KAHLE—_Munch. Med. Wochenschr._, 1914, LXI, 752.

 43. KEITH—Cancer: Relief of Pain and Possible Cure. New York, 1908.

 44. KEITH—_British. Med. Jour._, 1909, II, 140.

 45. KESSLER—_New York Medical Journal_, 1912, XVIC, 1122.

 46. LAMBE—Additional Reports on the Effects of a Peculiar Regimen of
       Cancer. London, 1815.

 47. LITTLE—_Boston Med. and Surg. Jour._, 1914, CLXXI, 587.

 48. MAYO, W. J.—_Annals of Surgery_, 1914, LIX, 805.

 49. MCCANN—Starving America. New York, 1912.

 50. MCGREGOR—_Brit. Med. Jour._, 1900, II, 982.

 51. MERRIAM—_St. Louis Courier of Med._, 1884, XII, 385; _New York
       Medical Journal_, 1912, XVIC, 378.

 52. Mortality Statistics, Bureau of the U. S. Census, 1911, 1912.

 53. MURPHY’S Clinics, Aug. 1912, Dec. 1912, Aug. 1913, Oct. 1913, Dec.
       1913, Feb. 1914, June 1914.

 54. NOWELL—_New England Med. Gaz._, 1914, XLIX, 461.

 55. PACKARD—_Boston Med. and Surg. Jour._, 1912, CLXVI, 452.

 56. PAGET—Lectures on Surgical Pathology. Philadelphia, 1854, 632.

 57. PARKER—Cancer. New York, 1885.

 58. REID—Cancer Research Laboratory, Manchester _Medical Chronicle_,
       Nov. 1912, and April 1914.

 59. RENNER—_Brit. Med. Jour._, 1910, II, 587, also 1911, I, 110.

 60. ROBERTS—Lectures on Dietetics and Dyspepsia. London, 1886, II
       Edition.

 61. ROBIN—_Bull. Gen. de Therapeutique_, 1913, CLXVI, 433.

 62. ROHDENBURG, BULLOCK, and JOHNSON—_Arch. of Int. Med._, 1911, VII,
       491.

 63. ROSS—Cancer, Its Genesis and Treatment. London, 1912, 88.

 64. ROUS—_Jour. of Exper. Med._, Lancaster, Pa., 1914, XX, 433.

 65. RUSSELL—Preventable Cancer. London, 1912, 96.

 66. SAJOUS—_Monthly Cyclop. and Med. Bull._, 1912, V, 219.

 67. SAJOUS—Internal Secretions, Vol. I, 785.

 68. SALEEBY—The Conquest of Cancer. New York, 1911.

 69. SANDWITH—_Clinical Journal_, 1910, XXXV, 409.

 70. SCHMIDT—_Medizin Klinik_, 1910, VI, 1690.

 71. SHERMAN—Chemistry of Food and Nutrition. New York, 1911, 260.

 72. SHERRINGTON and COPEMAN—_Brit. Med. Jour._, 1910, II, 787.

 73. SHIRLAW—Liverpool _Medico Chir. Jour._ 1913, XXXIII, 398.

 74. SOEGARD—_Zeitschr. für Krebsforsch_, 1913, XIII, 89.

 75. STUART-LOW—_Lancet_, 1909, II, 1138.

 76. SWEET, CORSON, WHITE, and SAXON—Proceed. Soc. for Exper. Biol. and
       Med. New York, Vol. X, 175.

 77. THOMPSON—Practical Dietetics, 1909, 256.

 78. TROISIER—_Gaz. des Hospiteaux_, 1913, LXXXVI, 2221.

 79. TUKE—Illustrations of the influence of the mind upon the body in
       health and disease. London, 1872.

 80. TURCK—_Vorlesungen Über Klin. Hæmatologie_, 1912.

 81. VENUS—_Centralbl. f. d. Grenzenb. d. Med. u. Chir._, 1910, XIII,
       209.

 82. VINCENT—Internal Secretions and the Ductless Glands. London, 1912.

 83. WAKEFIELD—_American Medicine_, 1904, VII, 659.

 84. WALSHE—The Anatomy, Physiology, Pathology, and Treatment of Cancer.
       Boston, 1844.

 85. WATSON, CHALMERS—Food and Feeding in Health and Disease. New York,
       1912. Appendix.

 86. WELLS—Chemistry of Tumors, _Chemical Pathology_, 2nd Ed., 1914.

 87. WILLIAMS—The Natural History of Cancer. New York, 1908.

 88. WOLF—_Zeitsch. für Krebsforsch_., 1905, III, 95.

 89. WOLFF—_Die Lehre von der Krebskrankheit_, Jena, 1913.

 90. WOLTER—Chemistry of Cancer, _Brockesn. Zeitschr._, 1913, LV, 260.




                                 INDEX


 Abderhalden, defensive ferments in cancer, 78

 Abernethy on vegetarian diet, 136

 Aborigines, freedom from cancer of, 48, 116

 Abstemiousness, effect on cancer, 139

 Acid, amino nitrogen, increased in cancer, 91

 Acid intoxication in cancer, 77

 Acidosis in cancer, 80

 Acids, oxyproteic, in the urine, increased in cancer, 90

 Addison’s disease, 97

 Adrenals, relation to cancer, 98

 Africa, absence of cancer in, 50, 52

 Agamogenesis, relation to cancer, 72

 Age affecting cancer, 22

 Ages of patients with cancer, 176

 Agnew on surgery in cancer, 170

 Alcohol, relation to cancer, 120

 Alkalinity of blood, diminished in cancer, 77

 Amino-acid nitrogen, increased in cancer, 91

 Ammonia fraction of nitrogen, increased in cancer, 91

 Amylopsin in cancer, 99

 Anabolism and cancer, 33

 Anæmia in cancer, 74

 Animal food a cause of cancer, 50, 51, 52, 55, 63, 69, 110, 113, 116,
    117, 132, 138, 141

 Animals, cancer in, 43

 Argentine Republic, cancer in, 57

 Australia, cancer in, 48

 Auto-intoxication and cancer, 155

 Autonomous action of cells, 33


 Bainbridge, local nature of cancer, 30

 Baltimore, cancer in, 65

 Banks, Sir William, on diet in cancer, 61

 Bashford, 55

 Beard, trypsin in cancer, 99

 Beatson’s operation, 102

 Beebe, diet and cancer, 80

 Beirut, rarity of cancer in, 56

 Bell, cancer from neglect of hygienic laws, 132

 Beneke, diet in cancer, 115

 Benratt, rarity of cancer in India, 53

 Betel chewing cancer, 54

 Biedl, hormone formation, 163

 Bio-chemistry of cancer, 39, 79, 83

 Blood changes in cancer, 74, 191
   frequent study of, in cancer, 160

 Blumenthal, oxyproteic acids increased in cancer, 90

 Boston, cancer in, 65

 Bowel action and cancer, 155, 157

 Braithwaite, plainer fare and less of it, 154
   salt and cancer, 129

 Brazil, rarity of cancer in, 57

 Breast, carcinoma of, 176
   non-cancerous tumors of, 178

 Bristol, disturbance of chemical equilibrium causing cancer, 143

 British Guiana, rarity of cancer in, 50

 Burnham, blood changes in cancer, 76

 Butter, valuable in cancer, 153

 Buttner, a fleshless diet, 154


 Cachexia in cancer, 74, 77

 Caffeine, nitrogen in, 119
   percentage of, in coffee, 119

 Cahen on Beatson’s operation, 102

 Calcium salts, effect on cancer, 101

 Cancer in the occupied and unoccupied, 130
   personal statistics of, 176
   problem, 201

 Carcinoma, personal statistics of, 174

 Casein sometimes allowable in cancer, 153

 Cases, personal, of cancer, 180‒197

 Catabolism and cancer, 33

 Causes of cancer, 27

 Centrosomes in cancer, 34, 85

 Cheese sometimes allowable in cancer, 154

 Chemistry of cancer, 39, 79, 83
   of cancer tissue, 78, 82
   of the body, 107

 Chicago, cancer in, 65

 China, rarity of cancer in, 55

 Chittenden’s experiments on nutrition, 112

 Chlorides in the urine, diminished in cancer, 92

 Cholesterin, relation to cancer, 83

 Chromosomes in cancer, 85

 Civilization, cancer a disease of, 44, 46, 50, 68, 109, 117

 Clinical considerations, 170
   study of cancer, 17, 18

 Coffee, consumption in United States, 118
   nitrogen in, 119
   relation to cancer, 117

 Cohnreich, blood in cancer, 76

 Cold storage, relation of, to cancer, 109

 Composition of human body, 107

 Conclusions, 170, 203

 Constipation and cancer, 157

 Contagiousness excluded, 19

 Cooper, Sir Astley on constitutional nature of cancer, 139

 Creoles in Africa, freedom from cancer of, 52

 Cytology of cancer, 74


 Danger from thyroid in cancer, 164

 Deaths from cancer in New York City, 145
   in United States, 144

 De Bloeme, Swart, and Terwen, imperfect nitrogen partition in cancer,
    90

 Defective urinary excretion and cancer, 158

 Deficiency of urinary solids in cancer, 88

 Definition of cancer, 30

 Degrez, imperfect nitrogen disintegration in cancer, 91

 Denmark, cancer in, 82

 Demineralization and cancer, 113

 Diabetes, relation of to cancer, 95

 Diet, effect of simple, in cancer, 121
   relation of, to cancer,
 46, 51, 53, 55, 57, 61, 63, 67, 80, 106, 115, 116, 133, 198

 Dietetic treatment of cancer, 171

 Disordered metabolism the cause of cancer, 74

 Ductless glands in cancer, 97

 Duration of cancer before treatment, 177


 Early treatment of cancer, medically, 147, 178, 208
   surgically, 177

 Eating, wrong- and over-, and cancer, 152

 Egypt, rarity of cancer in, 51, 57

 Ehrlich, effect of diet on cancer, 37

 Einhorn, Kahn, and Rosenblum, imperfect nitrogen partition in cancer,
    90

 Embryonic rests in cancer, 23, 25, 72

 Endocrinous glands, relation of, to cancer, 100

 England, cancer in, 51, 57, 61
   increase of cancer, with meat consumption, 116

 Environmental change and cancer, 59

 Enzymes, autolytic, in cancer tissue, 83

 Equilibrium of tissue elements, 111

 Esmarck and Oldehop, vegetarian diet in cancer, 115

 Etiology of cancer, 74

 Ewing, change in polar axis of cells in cancer, 34
   relation of cholesterin to cancer, 83


 Far East, rarity of cancer in, 55, 56

 Fiji Islands, rarity of cancer in, 50

 Fletcher, imperfect insalivation and cancer, 94

 France, cancer in, 62

 Frequency of cancer, 43

 Functional kidney derangement and cancer, 158


 Geographical distribution of cancer, 43

 “Germ of cancer,” 19

 Gigantism, 97

 Gout, relation to cancer, 72, 81

 Gratifying the taste, a cause of cancer, 108

 Gruner, toxicity of cancer juice, 78

 Gwyer, thymus feeding in cancer, 101


 Haig, cures of cancer by dietary restrictions, 141
   uric acid and cancer, 125, 141

 Harrower, relation of ductless glands to cancer, 97

 Heredity, influence of, 20

 Heterologous elements in cancer, 41

 Highest cancer mortality, 62

 Hislop and Fenwick, diet and cancer, 50

 Holland, high cancer mortality in, 118

 Hormones, relation of, to cancer, 100

 Hormone therapy in cancer, 162

 Hungary, low cancer mortality in, 118

 Hutchinson, amount of caffeine in tea and coffee, 119

 Hygienic laws, neglect of, a cause of cancer, 132

 Hyperacidity and cancer, 33


 Ichthyol locally in cancer, 166, 167

 Ideally correct blood stream and cancer, 149

 Increase of cancer, 47
   in the United States, 66

 Incurable cancer, 146

 Independent cell action, 73

 Indians, North American, rarity of cancer in, 67

 India, rarity of cancer in, 53

 Infectious diseases and cancer, 29

 Inoperable cancer, 146

 Insalivation, thorough, importance of in cancer, 95

 Internal secretions in cancer, 96‒103

 Intestinal fermentation in cancer, 92, 155
   stasis and cancer, 155
   toxins and cancer, 155

 Intolerance of certain articles a cause of disease, 127

 Intoxication, intestinal, and cancer, 155

 Iron, value of, in cancer, 161

 Irritation, local, and cancer, 124

 Isenberg on vegetarian diet in cancer, 142

 Italy, low cancer with low meat consumption, 63


 Jones, blood in cancer, 76


 Kahle, silica retention in cancer, 98

 “Kangri burn” cancer, 54, 126

 Keith, Skene, iron in cancer, 161

 Kellogg, absence of cancer with normal metabolism, 151

 Kerry, Ireland, low cancer mortality, 64

 Kessler, sulphur partition in cancer, 122

 Kidneys, faulty excretion and cancer, 157

 Korea, rarity of cancer in, 57


 Laboratory study of cancer, 175, 191

 Lambe on vegetarian diet, 136

 Lane, Sir Arbuthnot, intestinal stasis and cancer, 155

 Latham on cancer of the unoccupied, 61

 Leucocytosis in cancer, 75

 Lithæmia, relation to cancer, 72

 Liver, condition of in cancer, 91

 Local irritation and cancer, 21, 124
   medical treatment, 165

 Lott, Beatson’s operation for cancer, 102

 Lowest cancer mortality, 60, 64

 Lucerne, cancer in, 62

 Luxurious living a cause of cancer, 68, 138, 199


 McCann, erroneous preparation of foods, 123

 McGregor, absence of cancer in Fiji Islands, 50

 Madden, absence of cancer in Africa, 50

 Malaria and cancer, 21

 Mastication, thorough, importance of in cancer, 95

 Mayo, acidity and cancer, 124

 Meat consumption,
   in England, 116
   in the United States, 69

 Meat, relation to cancer, 51, 53, 55, 57, 63, 116

 Medical treatment of cancer, 135, 154

 Melanesians, exempt from cancer, 50

 Mental depression, influencing cancer, 86
   strain, relation to cancer, 81, 85

 Merriam, meat diet a cause of cancer, 141

 Metabolism, disordered, the cause of cancer, 74
   of cancer, 70
   perverted, and cancer, 150

 Mineral disturbances in the system in cancer, 122

 Mitosis, cell, relation to cancer, 85

 Mortality from cancer 90 per cent., 144

 Murphy on surgery in cancer, 171

 Myxœdema, 97


 Nature of cancer, 15, 29

 Negroes, rarity of cancer in, 52, 67

 Nervous strain, relation to cancer, 85

 New York City, deaths from cancer in, 65, 145
   negro death rate from cancer, 67

 New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, 8, 172

 New Zealand, cancer in, 50

 Nitrogen disintegration, imperfect in cancer, 91
   increase in colloid, in cancer, 90
   partition in cancer, 90
   small amount needed in the economy, 114

 Nitrogenous diet and cancer, 51, 53, 55, 57, 63, 81, 116

 Non-cancerous tumors of breast, 178

 Normal body cells and cancer, 31, 41, 70

 Nowell, serum therapy, 165

 Nuclei of cells, in cancer, 84

 Nucleo-proteids in cancer, 82

 Nutrition and cancer, 35, 36


 Occupation and cancer, 28

 Ovaries, internal secretion of, relation to cancer, 102

 Over-eating and cancer, 152

 Over-indulgence, effect of, 68

 Oxyproteic acid, relation to cancer, 90


 Packard, disturbance of mineral elements in blood, in cancer, 122

 Paget, Sir James, on constitutional nature of cancer, 140

 Paget’s disease, 174

 Pancreas, relation of, to cancer, 98

 Parasitism excluded, 19

 Paris, cancer in, 63

 Parker, Willard, on constitutional cause of cancer, 137

 Patience required for medical treatment of cancer, 134, 152

 Perseverance required for medical treatment of cancer, 134

 Personal cases of cancer, 180‒197

 Perverted metabolism and cancer, 74, 150

 Philadelphia, cancer in, 65

 Philippines, rarity of cancer in, 57

 Phosphates in the urine, diminished in cancer, 94

 Pittsburgh, cancer in, 65

 Pituitary secretion in cancer, 97, 99

 Plants, cancer in, 43

 Plasma of blood in cancer, 77

 Pluriglandular extracts in cancer, 164

 Polarity of cells in cancer, 34, 73

 Polynesians, exempt from cancer, 50

 Potassium acetate in cancer, 159
   phosphate in cancer, 160

 Precancerous conditions, 89

 Prevention of cancer, 148

 Prize fund for cure of cancer, 173

 Problem of cancer, 201

 Prophylaxis of cancer, 148

 Prosperity and cancer, 48, 68, 109

 Protein foods, harm from, 113
   metabolism, disturbed in cancer, 89
   requirement of the body, 112
   sufficient in vegetarian diet, 133

 Psoriasis, lessons from, in cancer, 128

 Putrefaction, intestinal, and cancer, 155


 Radium, value in cancer, 29, 145, 168

 Recurrent cancer, 146, 187‒195

 Red corpuscles in cancer, 76, 77

 Refinement of food, relation of, to cancer, 109

 Reid, increase of amino-acid nitrogen in cancer, 91

 Relation of diet to cancer, 198

 Renner, rarity of cancer among creoles, 51

 Requisites for development of cancer, 25

 Rheumatism, relation to cancer, 72

 Ribert, beginnings of cancer, 30

 Roberts, disturbance of salivary digestion from tea, 119

 Robin, relation between chlorine and nitrogen in cancer, 92

 Rohdenburg, Bullock, and Johnson, thymus gland in cancer, 101

 Rome, cancer in, 63

 Ross, thymus and calcium, harm from in cancer, 101
   relation of potash salts to cancer, 160

 Rous, cancer in rats checked by diet, 39

 Russian oil as a dressing in cancer, 166


 Saleeby, trypsin and amylopsin in cancer, 99

 St. Louis, cancer in, 65

 Sajous, adrenals in relation to cancer, 98

 Salivary secretion, acid in cancer, 94, 95, 161

 Salt, effect of, on cancer, 129

 Sarcoma of same origin as carcinoma, 175

 Scandinavia, cancer in, 125

 Schmidt, infectious diseases and cancer, 29

 Serum therapy, 164

 Sherman, composition of the human body, 107, 154

 Sherrington and Copeman, reproductive glands inhibiting growth of
    cancer, 103

 Shirlaw, pluriglandular extracts in cancer, 163

 Silica, retention of, in pancreas, in cancer, 98

 Simple diet, effect of, in cancer, 121

 Soëgaard, stomach cancer frequent in Norway, 125

 Solids in the urine, deficient in cancer, 87, 88

 Spontaneous disappearance of cancer, 36

 Stasis, intestinal, and cancer, 155

 Stuart-Low, relation of thyroid to cancer, 100

 Sub-oxidation and cancer, 132

 Sulphates, increased in cancer, 92

 Sulpho-cyanic acid, increased in cancer, 92

 Sulphur elements, altered in cancer, 92

 Supra-renal glands, relation of, to cancer, 97

 Surgery, operative, in cancer, 145, 147, 168, 179

 Surgical aspects of cancer, 7, 9, 10, 25

 Sweet, Corson, White, and Saxon, effect of diet on experimental tumors,
    38

 Switzerland, cancer in, 62

 Syphilis and cancer, 22


 Taste gratified, a cause of cancer, 108

 Tea, relation to cancer, 117

 Telluric influences in cancer, 22

 Testicles, internal secretion of, relation to cancer, 102

 Thompson on consumption of coffee and tea, 118, 154

 Thymus gland in cancer, 101

 Thyroid, danger from in cancer, 164
   relation to cancer, 97
   value of in cancer, 99, 163

 Tobacco, influence of, in cancer, 126

 Toxicity of urine, increased in cancer, 91

 Toxic secretion from cancerous mass, 70, 78, 104, 206

 Toxins, intestinal, and cancer, 92, 155

 Transmission of cancer, 20

 Traumatism and cancer, 24

 Trypsin in cancer, 99

 Tuberculosis and cancer, 16, 44, 45

 Tuke, influence of the mind on morbid processes, 86

 Türk, cytology of cancer, 74


 United States, cancer in, 16, 64, 68
   consumption of coffee in, 118
   consumption of meat in, 117

 Urea excretion, deficient in cancer subjects, 89

 Uricacidæmia, relation to cancer, 72

 Urinary disturbance, functional, and cancer, 158

 Urinary solids, deficient in cancer, 87, 88

 Urobilin, increased in cancer, 90


 Vaccine-therapy in cancer, 164

 Valais, cancer in, 62

 Vegetable protein, 133

 Vegetable tumors, 43

 Vegetarian diet affords sufficient protein, 133, 153

 Vegetarian diet and cancer, 50‒53, 55‒57, 63, 115, 123, 128, 136, 142,
    180‒197

 Venus on vegetarian diet in cancer, 142

 Vincent, quoting Ehrlich on resistance to athreptic influence, 163

 Virchow, on tumor formation, 31

 Voit’s dietary standard, 111

 Volumetric analysis of urine in cancer, 87, 94, 159


 Wakefield on hyperacidity of the blood plasma in cancer, 33

 Wales, cancer in, 57

 Walshe on the cause of cancer, 137

 Watson, effect of meat diet on tissue cells, 114

 Wealth, relation to cancer, 48, 68, 109

 Weight in cancer, 161, 192, 195

 Wells, nuclear proteins in cancer cells, 83

 Well-to-do men and cancer, 130

 West Indies, cancer in, 57

 Williams, cancer problems,
 36, 45, 47, 50, 58, 72

 Wolf, cancer in Australia, 47, 48

 Wolter, nucleo-proteids in cancer tissue, 82

 Wrong eating and cancer, 152


 Xanthin bases, increased in cancer, 90, 91

 X-ray, value in cancer, 29, 145, 167

-----

Footnote 1:

  According to the United States Mortality tables for 1912 there were
  44,531 deaths from cancer that year, or 77 per 100,000 living, while
  the rate in 1911 was 74.3, an increase of 2.7. Tuberculosis has shown
  a steady decline, the death for 1912 being the lowest on record, 149.5
  per 100,000, it having fallen from 200 per 100,000 in 1900, or over
  25%.

Footnote 2:

  No attempt has been made to collect an extensive bibliography, which
  might cover many pages, and a list is only given of those books and
  journal articles which I have been able to personally consult and to
  refer to in the text.




                          BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


  DIET AND HYGIENE IN DISEASES OF THE SKIN. $2.00 net.

  COMPENDIUM OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN, based on an analysis of thirty
    thousand consecutive cases, with a Therapeutic Formulary. $2.00.

  THE RELATIONS OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN TO INTERNAL DISORDERS. $1.50.

  PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATION OF LOCAL TREATMENT IN DISEASES OF THE SKIN.
    $1.00.

  THE INFLUENCE OF THE MENSTRUAL FUNCTION ON CERTAIN DISEASES OF THE
    SKIN. $1.00.

  ECZEMA, with an analysis of eight thousand cases of the disease.
    $1.25.

  ACNE, ITS ETIOLOGY, PATHOLOGY, AND TREATMENT. $2.00.

  SYPHILIS IN THE INNOCENT (Syphilis insontium) clinically and
    historically considered, with a plan for the legal control of the
    disease. $3.00.

  ACNE AND ALOPECIA. The Physician’s leisure library. Fifty cents.

  THE SKIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. Fifty cents.

  THE USE AND VALUE OF ARSENIC IN THE TREATMENT OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN.
    Fifty cents.

  ARCHIVES OF DERMATOLOGY. A quarterly Journal of Skin and Venereal
    Diseases. Vols. I-VIII. $3.00 each.

                  *       *       *       *       *

               PAUL B. HOEBER, 67‒69 East 59th St., N. Y.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Moved the ad page to the end.
 2. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 3. Retained anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as
      printed.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 5. Enclosed overlined font in ‾overlines‾.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANCER: ITS CAUSE AND TREATMENT, VOLUME 1 (OF 2) ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Cancer: Its Cause and Treatment, Volume 2 (of 2)

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Cancer: Its Cause and Treatment, Volume 2 (of 2)

Author: Lucius Duncan Bulkley

Release date: April 20, 2019 [eBook #59312]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing, Turgut Dincer and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANCER: ITS CAUSE AND TREATMENT, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Turgut Dincer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                                 CANCER
                                  ITS
                          CAUSE AND TREATMENT


                               VOLUME II




                           BY THE SAME AUTHOR


  CANCER, ITS CAUSE AND TREATMENT. Vol. I. $1.50 net.

  DIET AND HYGIENE IN DISEASES OF THE SKIN. $2.00 net.

  COMPENDIUM OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN, based on an analysis of thirty
    thousand consecutive cases, with a Therapeutic Formulary. $2.00.

  THE RELATIONS OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN TO INTERNAL DISORDERS. $1.50.

  PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATION OF LOCAL TREATMENT IN DISEASES OF THE SKIN.
    $1.00.

  THE INFLUENCE OF THE MENSTRUAL FUNCTION ON CERTAIN DISEASES OF THE
    SKIN. $1.00.

  ECZEMA, with an analysis of eight thousand cases of the disease.
    $1.25.

  ACNE, ITS ETIOLOGY, PATHOLOGY, AND TREATMENT. $2.00.

  SYPHILIS IN THE INNOCENT (Syphilis insontium), clinically and
    historically considered, with a plan for the legal control of the
    disease. $3.00.

  ACNE AND ALOPECIA. The Physician’s leisure library. Fifty cents.

  THE SKIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. Fifty cents.

  THE USE AND ABUSE OF ARSENIC IN THE TREATMENT OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN.
    Fifty cents.

  ARCHIVES OF DERMATOLOGY. A quarterly Journal of Skin and Venereal
    Diseases. Vols. I-VIII. $3.00 each.


               PAUL B. HOEBER, 67‒69 East 59th St., N. Y.




                                 CANCER
                                  ITS
                          CAUSE AND TREATMENT


                                   BY
                     L. DUNCAN BULKLEY, A.M., M.D.

    Senior Physician to the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, etc.


                               VOLUME II

[Illustration]

                                NEW YORK
                             PAUL B. HOEBER
                                  1917




                            Copyright, 1917
                           BY PAUL B. HOEBER

                        _Published, April, 1917_


                          Printed in U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   To
                             THE GOVERNORS
                                 of the
                   NEW YORK SKIN AND CANCER HOSPITAL
        whose kind appreciation of and assistance to the author
             in his clinical work in their institution have
                   done much to encourage him and to
                 promote the interest of the profession
                           in the branches of
                              DERMATOLOGY
                                  and
                                 CANCER
                           this second volume
                              is inscribed




                                PREFACE


Two years ago the present writer ventured to put forth a small book in
which cancer was considered from quite a different standpoint from that
commonly held by the profession and laity. The kindly reviews of the
medical press indicated that, while this was antagonistic to accepted
views, there was warrant for such an investigation, in view of the
steadily increasing mortality from cancer all over the world, under the
present mode of purely surgical treatment.

In these two years there has been very active study of cancer together
with a campaign of education in regard to the desirability and necessity
of operating very early in the disease, and consequently an increased
surgical activity. In spite of all this, or possibly on account of it,
the mortality from cancer during 1915 has been appreciably higher than
the average yearly death rate during the preceding five years. It would
seem, therefore, that there was increasing necessity for the study of
the conditions which cause the disease, as found in the human system,
rather than an increased study of pathological specimens and
experimentation on animals.

During these two years the writer has sought to understand the disease
better by constant clinical observation in private and public practise
and by wider acquaintance with literature, and has been only
strengthened and confirmed in the views which were set forth in the
former small book, and which he has held and practised for over thirty
years.

With some care he has prepared a second series of lectures which were
given to practising physicians attending the regular Wednesday afternoon
clinics at the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital in November and
December, 1916, and which are now submitted to the profession at large.

The reasons for presenting the medical aspects of cancer were given in
the former volume, also the hesitancy I felt lest, from an imperfect
carrying out of the necessary lines of internal treatment, harm might be
done or time lost in which there might possibly be some gain from
surgical treatment.

But the more I have studied cancer in the living and dying subject, and
the more I have tried to compass literature and analyze statistics, the
more have I felt compelled to push forward a campaign of education in
regard to the basic causes of the disease, ever with the thought of
prophylaxis, by inculcating right living.

It has been painful to me to present the mortality statistics in such an
unfavorable light as is seen in the following pages: but truth is truth
and truth must prevail.

No one can study carefully the remarkable book of Hoffman on “The
Mortality Statistics from Cancer Throughout the World,” and Williams’
“Natural History of Cancer,” and Wolff’s “Die Lehre von der
Krebskrankheit,” and the special volume concerning “Mortality from
Cancer and Other Malignant Tumors in the Registration Area of the United
States,” recently issued by the Bureau of the Census, without feeling
that something more should be attempted to arrest the progress of this
direful disease.

This seems all the more necessary and proper in view of the gratifying
decrease of mortality which has been obtained in tuberculosis, of 27.8
per cent from 1900 to 1915, by diligent and intelligent medical
supervision.

The problem of cancer is indeed a great one, but surely it is not to be
solved by greater activity along the lines under which its mortality has
steadily risen 28.7 per cent during the same period just mentioned, in
which tuberculosis has fallen so greatly. If this death rate of both
diseases should continue the same for fifteen years more, cancer would
outstrip tuberculosis in its actual fatality. Reason would seem to
indicate the necessity of a radical change in our point of view and a
complete change in our line of treatment.

In the text of these and former lectures I have endeavored to show why
and how cancer should be regarded from its medical aspects, and to
illustrate by a few cases some of the results which could be obtained
from this line of procedure. There is absolutely no claim or suggestion
that the cancer problem has been solved, but only an aim to put the
_real cancer problem_ in such a light that others might follow and
develop the subject in a manner fitting to the very great importance of
the end so strongly desired by all, namely, the checking of the steadily
rising morbidity and mortality of cancer.

Laboratory studies are of practical value as they supplement and
enlighten clinical observation. The microscope and test tube have
accomplished much for medicine and with animal experimentation have
undoubtedly rendered inestimable service in its scientific advancement.
But divorced from the practical study of patients they may fail in the
ultimate end desired. In these and the former lectures I have endeavored
to indicate certain lines of scientific investigation along which much
more laboratory effort is desirable, in order to determine more
definitely the metabolic and blood conditions which lead up to cancer.
These I have attempted to follow to a limited degree in many cases, and
found them of great service in their management.

In some of the reviews of the former volume some adverse criticism was
given on account of the absence of microscopic findings confirming the
diagnosis of the cases reported. I explained at the time that any
attempt to excise portions of tissue for such study would at once
endanger the patient and imperil the success of treatment, by giving
occasion to metastases, from the opening of blood vessels and
lymphatics. This matter is treated of more fully in the present
lectures. It is to be remembered that the vast majority of operations
for cancer are undertaken upon a purely clinical diagnosis, and it may
be undeniably stated that not one half of them are confirmed
subsequently by competent microscopic evidence, except, of course, in
properly equipped hospitals. In some of the cases now presented
pathological proof has been presented, while in every one the clinical
signs were so unmistakable that no one could possibly doubt the
correctness of the diagnosis.

A number of reviewers of the former volume regretted that fuller and
more definite statements had not been made in regard to the exact diet
and mode of treatment employed in the cases reported. I had explained
that it was very difficult to develop all this in the brief compass of a
few lectures; indeed I may now say that it would take many times the
space and time which could be given to it to develop fully all the
possibilities and requirements of a dietary and medicinal treatment in
every case. The object rather was to inculcate the basic idea of the
true causation of cancer, leaving it to the practitioners present to
carry out the measures calculated to reach the desired end. In order to
make matters very clear I may occasionally have repeated some things
said in the former lectures, and some repetition may be found in these
successive lectures; but this will be pardoned when it is considered how
necessary repetition often is in order to establish correctly a new
thought. The cases were given as illustrations of what could be
accomplished along the lines indicated.

In the present lectures I have endeavored to carry the thought still
further and to develop the fundamental principles on which treatment and
prophylaxis are to be based. I have also been much more explicit in
regard to diet, and have given the exact dietary which has been used
with advantage in very many cases in private and hospital practise. In
regard to medical treatment I have also been more definite, although it
would be quite impossible to indicate all the different remedies which
those and other patients have taken over varying periods of time, to
meet different requirements of the system and individual peculiarities.
I think and believe, however, that sufficient data are given to enable
the competent and careful physician, who is able and willing to give
sufficient time and adequate attention to these cases, to accomplish the
same results, provided he has thoroughly mastered and applied the matter
contained in these two small books.

I fully realize the responsibility I have undertaken in gathering and
revealing the evidence of the unsatisfactory results of the manner of
regarding and treating cancer in years past, and certainly would not
have done this were I not so strongly assured that there was something
better to offer. How far I am right in my thesis I now leave to the
kindly judgment of my professional brethren. My only hope is that I may,
in some measure, have assisted in stemming the tide of the fearful
ravages made by cancer, and that others may investigate still more
deeply along the lines of its medical aspects, with increasingly
satisfactory results.

                                                      L. DUNCAN BULKLEY.

 JANUARY, 1917.
   531 MADISON AVE.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
                                LECTURE I

 CANCER AS A MEDICAL OR SURGICAL DISEASE                              19


                               LECTURE II

 INFLUENCE OF SEX, AGE, OCCUPATION, RACE, CLIMATE, AND FOOD ON
   CANCER                                                             47


                               LECTURE III

 THE MORTALITY FROM CANCER; ANALYSIS OF SURGICAL STATISTICS.          74


                               LECTURE IV

 INOPERABLE AND RECURRENT CANCER; METASTASIS; THE BLOOD IN CANCER    111


                                LECTURE V

 DIETETIC AND MEDICAL TREATMENT OF CANCER PROPHYLAXIS                144


                               LECTURE VI

 RESULTS: PERSONAL CASES                                             188


                                 SUMMARY

 THE REAL CANCER PROBLEM                                             239


 INDEX                                                               273




                                 CANCER
                                  ITS
                          CAUSE AND TREATMENT




                               LECTURE I
                CANCER AS A MEDICAL OR SURGICAL DISEASE


In my lectures given here two years ago I considered, as far as I could
in the time allowed, the nature of cancer,[1] and the evidence in favor
of its being a medical rather than a purely surgical disease; and in
order that the trend of what shall follow may be clearly understood,
brief reference may be made to some of the principal points studied and
developed in the preceding lectures. To this end I may restate the
conclusions presented at their close, as developed in the lectures,
perhaps with some alterations or additions which two years’ further
study, observation, and treatment of cancer may suggest.

1. Cancer is but a deviation from the normal life and action of certain
of the ordinary cells of the body, which, for some reason, difficult to
understand, take on an abnormal or morbid action: with this there is a
continued tendency in them to a malignancy which invades contiguous
tissue, associated with a pernicious anemia which in the end tends to
destroy life.

2. There is some reason to believe that this diseased action first takes
place in what are known as “embryonic rests” or pre-natal, wrongly
placed tissue elements. These latter, however, are now shown to exist in
every individual in many localities, but the reason why at some
particular time they take on this malignant action, and form cancer, has
not yet been satisfactorily explained.

3. Cancer is _not_ wholly due to traumatic causes; although these may
play a not inconsiderable part in its occurrence in certain localities
and cases.

4. It is pretty conclusively decided that cancer is _not_ caused by a
microörganism or parasite; although various forms of these have been
found in connection with the disease, and each has been claimed as the
cause of cancer.

5. It is known clinically and experimentally that cancer is _not_
contagious.

6. _Nor_ is it hereditary in any appreciable degree; although certain
rare instances have been reported in which such seems to be the case,
and though some tendency in that direction has been demonstrated in
certain strains of mice.

7. Occupation has _not_ any very great influence on the occurrence of
cancer; although it is more frequent in some pursuits than in others.

8. Cancer is _not_ altogether a disease of older years; although its
incidence is greatly increased with advancing age.

9. Cancer does _not_ especially belong to or affect any particular sex,
race, or class of persons. It is, however, more frequent in females than
in males, although of late years the proportion in the latter is
steadily rising.

10. Cancer is _not_ confined to any climate, location, or section of the
earth, but has been observed in all countries and climates, though with
different frequency.

11. _No_ single cause of cancer has yet been demonstrated; nor is it
likely that this will ever be the case, as experimental and other
investigations have covered almost every possible line of research, with
only _negative_ results.

12. The exclusion of almost every other possible cause of cancer, as
well as its pathological history and biochemical studies, all lead,
therefore, to deranged metabolism as the only remaining possible
etiological element. This latter acts by inducing changes in nutrition,
and these in turn depend on diet and the proper or improper action of
the secretory and excretory organs; these latter may, still further, be
affected by nervous influences.

13. While the biochemistry of cancer does not as yet throw very great
light on its true nature and cause, enough has been determined to show
that the morbid changes in the cells are largely associated with
deranged metabolism.

14. The blood in advancing cancer manifests changes which indicate vital
alterations in the action of the organs which form blood and control the
nutrition of the body and its cells.

15. Clinical and experimental evidence demonstrate that the secretions
and excretions of the body exhibit departures from normal; these, while
not wholly pathognomonic of cancer, still indicate metabolic
disturbances which involve the nutrition of the cellular elements, and
these disturbances are of importance.

16. The evidence seems certain that the cancer mass, when fully
developed, secretes a hormone or poison which tends to augment its own
growth, and hastens the lethal progress of the disease.

17. The mortality from cancer is undoubtedly on the increase in every
portion of the globe, in spite of the assiduous activity of the
laboratories and the immense advances in surgical procedure.

18. This increase in mortality is seen to vary inversely, and in about
the same proportion, with the steadily diminishing mortality of
tuberculosis, under recent careful medical guidance.

19. The increase of cancer mortality is found to follow closely along
the lines of modern civilization.

20. The extension of cancer appears to depend largely upon the altered
conditions of modern life, particularly along the lines of
self-indulgence in eating and drinking, and indolence.

21. The augmentation in the consumption of meat, coffee, and alcoholic
beverages in civilized communities is seen to be coincident with the
great and proportionately greater augmentation of the mortality from
cancer.

22. The nerve strain of modern life seems to be an element of
importance, both through disturbance of metabolism and by direct action
on morbidly deranged cells.

23. No single remedy for cancer has been, or will probably ever be,
discovered, since it is conceded that there is no single cause for the
disease. The history of cancer abounds in the heralding of various
vaunted remedies, quack and other, including sera, whose employment has
only ended in the disappointment of medical men and in the deluded hopes
of innumerable sufferers.

24. Modern surgery has materially improved the statistics relating to
the immediate results of operative procedures; but the total
achievements along this line are insignificant when compared with the
steadily rising death rate, and ultimate mortality of about 90 per cent
of those once afflicted with cancer.

25. Surgery has had, and may yet have, its function to perform in
removing some of the _products_ of the constitutional state causing
cancer, more or less efficiently, curing some patients and prolonging
the life of others; but from past experience it can never hope to lessen
the morbidity of cancer. The reason for this is that it attacks a
symptom only, and not the underlying cause.

26. The X-ray and radium, as also caustics, are in the same position as
surgery, and can do little more than cause to disappear, more or less
temporarily, some of the lesions which have developed from causes which
they cannot reach.

27. With all these means the measure of success, aside from the
technical skill of the operator, depends largely on the duration and the
extent of development of the malignant growth before treatment: the
earlier such local treatment is undertaken, other things being equal,
the greater the possibilities of success.

28. The same is true in regard to the treatment of cancer by dietary and
medical means. The earlier the morbid constitutional process, or state,
leading to tumor formation is attacked by proper dietetic, hygienic, and
medicinal measures, the greater the promise and expectation of success,
present and permanent.

29. The cure and prevention of cancer, therefore, and the checking of
its increasing occurrence and mortality, depend largely upon the early
adoption of such measures as will limit the agencies which induce the
formation of the new growth: these are certain derangements of the body
juices which tend to bad nutrition and disturbance of the action of the
body cells.

30. The simple life, with the avoidance of the dietetic and other causes
which have been found to induce cancer in nations and individuals,
promises the best hope for the arrest of its rapidly increasing
development and mortality throughout the world.

31. It is more than possible, however, that the long continued operation
of many baneful causes has produced such a degeneration of tissue in the
human race that it will take a generation or more of proper living to
make the beneficial impression on the general occurrence and mortality
of cancer which is so longed for.

It is quite impossible and unnecessary to elaborate again the facts upon
which these conclusions are based, which were given very fully in my
previous lectures and book; but we may briefly consider some of the
features just presented, and some of the evidence why cancer should be
considered from a medical rather than a surgical standpoint. For it must
be conceded that both the general medical profession and the laity still
regard the disease as belonging to surgery, and look only to the knife
for any hope in its treatment. In spite of all that has been done the
present outlook for the checking of its rising mortality by this means,
and for the prevention of cancer, is bad indeed, as will be shown in a
later lecture.

But, gentlemen, many great surgeons, in past and present time, as quoted
in my former lectures, have acknowledged verbally and in writing their
inability to cope with cancer as a disease, and have recognized time and
again that they operated only because they knew of nothing better to do.
Often it is acknowledged that the operation is only palliative, in the
hope, alas, how often futile, that some good might result from it, in
the chance that the dread disease would not return. We shall see later,
when we come to study the mortality of cancer in various locations, and
an analysis of surgical statistics, how slight the foundation is for
such hopes.

Both in the past and present times many surgeons of eminence, well
acquainted with the disease, whom I quoted in my former lectures, have
also more or less casually expressed the conviction that there was some
deep-seated constitutional cause of cancer which baffled recognition,
but which must have to do with the diet or mode of living of those
afflicted. The most recent of these is Dr. William J. Mayo, who has
spoken in no uncertain terms along this line, in a recent address as
President of the American Surgical Association. And yet how relatively
little intelligent effort has been put forth to discover and amend these
conditions, and to remove the bodily derangement which eventuates in the
formation of the foci of disease which later become malignant and form
what is called cancer, or to modify the blood changes which ultimately
destroy life!

In a long experience I have seldom, if ever, come across a patient with
cancer who had had any intelligent and prolonged attempt to check its
development by dietary, hygienic, and medicinal means; invariably the
knife, X-ray, and radium have been the only measures under
consideration. Also, after an operation the patient is dismissed, or
watched for a recurrence and again operated on, with no prolonged effort
to so modify the constitution that the same causes shall not reproduce
the malady in the same or other localities. And yet I have narrated to
you cases of undoubted cancer, verified by competent surgeons, who urged
instant removal, which had entirely disappeared without operation under
the line of treatment detailed, and who remained in perfect health for
many years, sixteen in two instances. I also reported cases illustrating
the beneficial result of dietary and medicinal measures in cases
recurrent after operation. This matter will be more fully considered in
a later lecture, with further illustrations.

We may now consider some general matters bearing on the question of a
medical rather than an exclusively surgical aspect of cancer.

The founders of the Index Medicus placed cancer among the diseases of
metabolism, along with gout, obesity, chronic rheumatism, diabetes, and
a few conditions of minor importance. This grouping of cancer in no wise
interferes with the idea that a chronic local irritant may be the
_exciting_ cause of the _local_ development of the tumor, which becomes
malignant, in any particular situation; any more than what is observed
in the case of late syphilis, where a gummy tumor or a bone lesion may
appear at a point of injury, or where gout will develop in a joint which
has been bruised.

But it does show that broad medical thought has long recognized that
cancer is not a purely local disease, but that it arises from some
disturbance of nutrition, tending to localize in some particular spot,
even as a neuralgia will occur in some special nerve and be reached, not
by local measures, but by those of a general nature. Repeated casual
observations have often been made by clinicians, and even by surgeons of
prominence, of the apparent relations between cancer and gout or
rheumatism, and also diabetes, and all recognize the rebelliousness of
cancer when it occurs in connection with obesity. The late Dr. John B.
Murphy was very strong in regard to this latter point. The constant
occurrence of cancer in rheumatic individuals is a very striking
feature, which I observe almost daily.

It is worthy of remark that cancer begins to appear at a wholesale rate
at the age when metabolism begins to slow up, and some time after the
body growth has become fully established. At this period people are apt
to lose the balance between physical effort and the intake of food,
eating as much as ever, perhaps more, while becoming more sedentary. At
the same time the emunctories become less active. The various affections
of metabolism now tend to appear and are associated with imperfect
oxidation, or diminished tolerance toward certain ingesta. It is
interesting to note that in a study of many thousand cases of eczema I
found the disease to be actually more frequent, in proportion to those
living, between the ages of 50 and 55 than at any other period of life
after the infantile period, or the first five years of life; just about
the same time when cancer is most common. And the constitutional
conditions at the bottom of eczema are very much the same as those in
cancer.

Patients with a cancer just beginning will often, or even generally,
seem to be in excellent health. It is indeed remarkable to observe how
commonly patients with beginning breast cancer will seem to be in a
splendid condition of health. They are ruddy and blooming in appearance,
and when the lump is first discovered it is hard indeed to believe that
if the erroneous life processes which caused the cancerous lesion to
develop are not checked, the patient will before long succumb to the
direful disease. Williams remarks that “such types are indications of
hypernutrition.”

But a most careful study of these patients in every particular will so
constantly reveal such errors of life and derangements of metabolism
that these must be looked upon as contributing causes, at least, to the
development of the local condition which later becomes malignant; in the
same way as the patient will appear to be in blooming health just before
an attack of acute gout. For when these conditions are rectified by
proper dietary and medicinal measures the local cancerous condition not
only ceases to develop but actually disappears without surgical removal,
as I have repeatedly shown you. These errors and derangements are not
commonly evident on a superficial examination, and often are recognized
only after very painstaking search, and re-search.

We have not yet arrived at such a clear knowledge of metabolism as to
understand just where the fault lies in these cases of seeming perfect
health, with the beginning of a neoplasm which may eventuate so
disastrously. But we do know that what passes for good health is often
fictitious, and is quite compatible with even grave disorders of various
kinds. It is more than possible that the apparent well-being of the
patient with beginning cancer, which is often observed to be associated
with uricacidemia, points also to the correctness of our thesis in
regard to its internal causation. As remarked in one of my former
lectures, quoting Ribert, “no one has ever seen the beginning of mammary
cancer” and no one will ever see the beginnings of cancer of internal
organs.

But, whatever may be thought of Haig’s theories or statements regarding
uric acid, there is no question but that many maladies of many kinds
have their origin in the concatenation of processes which has long been
recognized clinically as lithemia. Personally I believe that sooner or
later it will be generally recognized that the starting point of cancer
occurs in some cell or cells, previously normal, probably as the result
of local irritation, in which there is a deposit of some of the elements
of faulty nitrogenous partition, induced by undue ingestion of animal
protein: and that the malignant, reproductive process in the cells is
kept up by a continuance of the same supply of imperfectly disintegrated
nitrogenous matter.

The condition of the urine furnishes a most invaluable indicator and
guide as to the systemic derangements and their correction. This has not
reference to the presence of sugar, albumin, or casts, but rather to
other features, reflecting the manner in which metabolism is performed.
This subject was gone into pretty thoroughly in my former lectures, but
must be briefly considered here, because of the great importance of the
subject.

It is well known that, while the products of the digestion and
disassimilation of carbohydrates and fats pass off by the lungs,
generally without harm, those of protein and salts are eliminated by the
kidneys, and may be the cause of various systemic derangements. The
urine, therefore, when most carefully analyzed volumetrically, exhibits
in the clearest possible manner how the metabolism is carried on and
where the error lies.

From a study of hundreds of complete volumetric analyses of urine in
dozens of cancer patients, both in the very early and late stages of the
disease, I have found that this excretion almost invariably exhibits
departures from normal which are significant.

First to be mentioned is the relation of the total solids excreted daily
to the body weight of the individual; for it is evident that a person
weighing 200 pounds should pass off more than a smaller person. The
following table represents fairly well the total solids that should pass
daily in order to maintain a healthy equilibrium:

              _Body Weight_        _Total Urinary Solids_
                      90 pounds                    500 grains
                      95   〃                       535   〃
                     100   〃                       570   〃
                     105   〃                       605   〃
                     110   〃                       640   〃
                     115   〃                       675   〃
                     120   〃                       710   〃
                     125   〃                       745   〃
                     130   〃                       780   〃
                     135   〃                       815   〃
                     140   〃                       850   〃
                     145   〃                       885   〃
                     150   〃                       920   〃
                     155   〃                       955   〃
                     160   〃                       990   〃
                     165   〃                      1025   〃
                     170   〃                      1060   〃
                     175   〃                      1095   〃
                     180   〃                      1130   〃
                     185   〃                      1165   〃
                     190   〃                      1200   〃
                     195   〃                      1235   〃
                     200   〃                      1270   〃
                     205   〃                      1305   〃

These figures do not represent much active exercise, and with increased
bodily exertion the solids passed should be more. Men excrete about
one-tenth more than women; there are also less urinary solids passed
with advancing age, and about five per cent may be deducted for each ten
years after forty.

The estimation of the total solids is easy with Haines’ modification of
Hasser’s method. _Multiply the last two figures of the specific gravity
of the urine by the number of ounces voided in 24 hours, and add ten per
cent to the product._ Thus, if the amount passed in 24 hours was 36
ounces with a specific gravity of 1.021, it would be 36 × 21 = 756 + 10
per cent = 832 grains of solids in the whole amount of urine excreted
that day. By comparing this with the table it can be readily ascertained
if the amount is above or below the normal standard for the body weight
of the patient. For many years I have employed this method of
determining the urinary output in hundreds of patients with various
diseases of the skin and cancer, and have found it of inestimable value.
It is understood, of course, that by dietary and medicinal measures the
urinary solids are to be brought up to and maintained at normal.

The actual acidity of the urine, as measured by the oxalic acid and
phenolphthalein test, is also of the greatest importance. This is not
difficult of application and is daily used in my laboratory; the litmus
paper test is of relatively little value in comparison with an actual
chemical measurement. Thus, with an average standard of 300 we not
infrequently find an acidity of 500 or 600, or even 1000 or more, or it
may sink to 200 or 100, or even be strongly alkaline. In cancer I have
striven, by diet and remedies, to keep it a little below normal, as it
has been shown that the blood in this disease exhibits a constantly
increasing tendency to diminished alkalescence, or, wrongly called,
increased acidity.

But further and very careful volumetrical urinary analysis is very
important to determine and maintain the metabolism in its proper
condition. Time does not permit such an elaboration of this subject as
might be desired, and I can only call your attention briefly to some of
the points brought out in my former lectures.

Many observers have found the nitrogenous disintegration very imperfect
in cancer cases, and oxyproteic acids are increased and even that in
very early cancer. An increase of amino-acid nitrogen was found by Reid
in practically every case studied. Others have found an increase in
colloid nitrogen, to more than double the normal amount, and also
increased elimination of xanthin and urinary ammonia; so that all
observers testify to a disturbed nitrogen partition in cancer. The
elimination of urea is certainly greatly diminished, even in early
stages and when on a full diet, as I have almost invariably observed.

The sulphur partition is also found to be imperfect, in new and old
cancer cases, and even a great increase in the urinary discharge of
sulphates is constantly noticed in my analyses. Associated with these
errors in the nitrogenous and sulphur element is the very common and
persistent increase of indican, showing stasis in the small intestine,
with bacterial putrefaction.

Imperfect intestinal elimination is constantly observed in cancer cases,
both habitually and in the very early, formative period, and also later,
even before any recourse to morphin, which, of course, heightens the
trouble. In recording the statements of these patients I have been so
struck with the almost invariable history of constipation before the
first appearance or suspicion of the cancer that I cannot help feeling
very strongly the possibility that the toxins produced by the millions
of microörganisms, generated through intestinal stasis and fecal
putrefaction, play a great part in the production of that blood
dyscrasia which culminates in the formation of the malignant new growth.

I mentioned to you last year that in hundreds of tests of the saliva in
cancer patients the reaction was found to be acid almost invariably,
until corrected by dietary and other treatment. I have this test made
and recorded daily, half an hour before meals and half an hour after
meals, on my cancer patients in the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital. I
have also the urine volumetrically analyzed each week, and the results
all tabulated in columns on the history sheet, so that the changes may
be compared weekly, in regard to each constituent, as treatment
progresses. The same is done with the weekly studies on the blood, which
I hope to present in full before long.

I think, gentlemen, that from what I have said you can see that the
medical aspects of cancer loom up pretty large, and yet we are only
beginning to study the disease along these lines. We see, thus, that
cancer is not primarily a surgical affection, and that the mere ablation
of an offending portion of the body which has become diseased can never
preclude a new portion from becoming affected, or prevent a recurrence
in the same location; indeed, this often seems to be stimulated and
increased by the trauma and by the deranged lymphatic and vascular
circulation caused by the operation and the dissemination of actively
growing cancer cells through these channels. This will appear more fully
later when we come to study the increasing mortality of cancer during
these later years of active surgery, and when we come to analyze the
actual reports of operative procedures.

I hope, gentlemen, that by these lectures I may succeed in satisfying
your minds that if anything is to be done towards staying the steadily
rising frequency and increasing mortality of cancer, it must be by
carefully wrought out medical means, and not by the knife.




                               LECTURE II
  INFLUENCE OF SEX, AGE, OCCUPATION, RACE, CLIMATE, AND FOOD ON CANCER


While cancer is no respecter of persons, and affects all, rich and poor,
old and young, male and female, there are some interesting features
regarding the disease as it occurs under various conditions which are
worthy of consideration.

We have seen in the former lecture that cancer is not a definite
something, from without, that attacks the human frame, but that it is
only a faulty development and action of certain body cells, which were
once normal, with a steady decline in bodily health which tends to a
fatal issue in a very large proportion of those once affected with the
disease.

We have seen that the cancer patient, both in the very earliest stages
and during the whole period of the disease, gives evidence of departures
from the ideal normal life, and presents functional disorders of various
organs, with derangements of metabolism; these point to errors of
nutrition, which latter are of significance in connection with the
development and continuance of the malignant disease. The conclusion
offered was that cancer is a medical affection, due to systemic causes,
and that the simple surgical excision of a certain diseased portion
cannot be expected to check or remove such a malady, or to prevent
recurrence. And this has been abundantly demonstrated by the history of
the disease, with its steadily increasing mortality under increasingly
active surgical treatment during the last fifteen years, as was shown in
my former lectures and will be further illustrated later.

Recognizing, then, that cancer is a great and widespread disorder of
nutrition, let us consider some of the facts regarding its extension and
some of the influences concerned in its production.

SEX.—Cancer is much more frequent in females than in males. In the
United States Mortality Reports for 1914 there were 31,138 females to
21,282 males; thus, in a total of 52,420 deaths from cancer 59.4 per
cent were in females, with a preponderance of 9,856. This excess is
largely due to cancer of the breast, from which there were 5,423 deaths,
and cancer of the female genital organs, causing 8,152 deaths, of which
7,470 were from cancer of the uterus.

The death rate in males, however, seems to be increasing of late years;
in the United States in 1912 males formed 39.7 per cent; in 1913, 40.1
per cent; and in 1914, 40.6 per cent. In England, according to Williams,
the proportion of males to females is increasing much more rapidly. This
greater mortality of males is due to the greater number of deaths from
cancer of the stomach and liver, buccal cavity, and skin. In 1914 there
were 19,889 deaths from cancer of the stomach and liver, or 37.9 per
cent of the whole number; of these 10,122 were in males to 9,767 in
females, or an excess of 355 males, whereas in 1912 the females were 87
in excess. In the United States the cancer death rate for males has
increased since 1901 31.8 per cent and for females 25.3 per cent.

AGE.—Carcinoma is exceedingly rare under 20 years of age, most malignant
tumors at that period being sarcomata. After 25 the number of deaths
from cancer about doubles each five years up to 40, and then increases
steadily, until the actually greatest number of deaths, 6,909 (3,071
males, 3,838 females), occurred between 60 and 64 years of age, after
which they decreased steadily; there were 267 deaths at 90 and over, 8
of them being 100 years and over. At no period did the deaths of males
exceed that of females, and from 35 to 39 years of age the latter were
almost three times that of males.

OCCUPATION.—Many attempts have been made to trace the influence of
occupation upon the incidence of cancer, but thus far very little of
practical interest has been demonstrated; the difficulties concerning
this investigation are immense, owing to absence of essential and
accurate data. There have been many lists presented, but few of which
agree as to details, and all need to be corrected as to the proportion
of those living at different ages. There is also the question as to the
effect of local or general agencies; thus, as to the result of local
injuries on the skin, and also in regard to other agencies, whatever
they may be, which produce internal cancer; for tables of occupation do
not generally refer to sex, age, or location of the disease.

First, to dismiss the question as to the direct result of local injuries
in inducing cancer of the skin, which, at the most, caused only 3.7 per
cent of all cancer deaths in 1914, we may cite a few instances in which
this appears to be pretty well established.

The occurrence of epithelioma as a direct result of repeated and
protracted exposure to X-ray is familiar to all, and is particularly
interesting because it occurs commonly among younger persons, and at a
time of life when epithelioma is rare; and especially also because the
X-ray is constantly effective in curing epithelioma. The rarity of
epithelioma resulting from X-ray, considering the enormous amount of
exposure which must have occurred in making and using X-ray tubes,
implies, however, that there must be some other cause also at work. It
has been urged, therefore, that the skin tissue being altered and
weakened from repeated and protracted exposure to X-rays, more readily
falls prey to some of the chemical or other irritating agencies which
have been observed to be followed by epithelioma.

Time does not permit even a mention of the various elements, which are
many, that have been credited as excitants of cutaneous epithelioma; but
brief allusion may be made to one which formerly attracted much
attention, mainly in England; this refers to chimney-sweeps cancer, the
mortality from which was at one time at least 5 times greater than that
from cancer in males generally, at the same age. This is now, however,
of relatively infrequent occurrence, owing to the adoption of other
methods of cleaning chimneys. The epithelioma, which more commonly
developed on the scrotum, was believed to be due to the long continued
irritation caused by the constant presence of soot on the part; other
products of combustion and tar derivations have also been accredited
with the same result.

The question of the influence of occupation along other lines is really
more interesting, because more obscure; but a careful study of available
data tends to show the correctness of the thesis on which my former
lectures and these are based. This, as you know, is that our so-called
advancing civilization, with all its errors of life, in many directions,
is at the bottom of the steady increase in the mortality from cancer.

One of the most interesting contributions to this was the investigation
made by Dr. Latham, Registrar-General, in a study of cancer returns in
England; this showed that the mortality from the disease was more than
twice as great among well-to-do men having no specific occupation as
among occupied males in general, the respective mortality ratio being 96
for the former and only 44 for the latter. The same observation has been
made elsewhere.

Moreover, it is reported from several reliable sources that the death
rate from cancer in many cities is proportionately greater among the
rich and those in easy circumstances than among the poor, wage-earning
element of society. This would seem to show that occupation in general
acts favorably against the development of cancer. This fact is quite
understandable when we consider that those engaged in active work are
less liable to suffer from the effects of gluttony and indolence, with
their concurrent metabolic disturbances, than the well-to-do with ease
and luxurious habits. It is remarkable, however, that in asylums, homes
for the aged, prisons, convents, monasteries, etc., where the inmates
are relatively unoccupied, many writers confirm the fact that cancer is
very seldom seen; but this again is explained by the simple and frugal
diet enforced, with very little meat, which agrees with our thesis.

Statistics from life insurance companies show that cancer is decidedly
more common among persons of over-weight than among under-weights.

In regard to the occupations of those dying from cancer it is
interesting to note that standing among the highest per 100,000
population, in English statistics, come brewers, inn-keepers, and
butchers, whose metabolism can be greatly disturbed by alcohol and meat;
also indoor servants are more apt to be affected, while those of more or
less sedentary occupation, such as school teachers, clergymen,
physicians, and tailors, likewise stand very high on several lists. On
the other hand, those engaged in active physical exercise, such as
miners, farm laborers, carpenters, blacksmith, mail-carriers, and
others, are among those least frequently attacked.

RACE.—Cancer has been observed in every race, though the proportion of
cases is observed to vary greatly among different peoples; but it is
interesting to note that it is universally agreed by those that have
studied the subject that the difference in frequency relates very
largely to the degree of civilization involved. The blond Nordic race,
however, seems to be more susceptible to the disease than the darker
races, originally of Asiatic origin; and it is the former who have
pushed forward modern civilization, with all its errors of life.

Thus cancer is everywhere reported to be rare, and sometimes almost
absent, in primitive, uncivilized peoples, but it has been repeatedly
observed, in many localities, that as these same people mix with
Europeans and adopt their diet and mode of life, cancer is sure to
increase, until its frequency often about equals that in their highly
civilized neighbors. I went over this matter pretty fully in my former
lectures and cannot dwell on it now, or give examples. I can only
emphasize the fact that this furnishes a strong support to the
contention that cancer depends upon disorders of metabolism, which are
certainly increasing under the various elements which compose what is
called advanced civilization.

CLIMATE AND LOCALITY.—There is no evidence to prove that climate has any
influence in the production of cancer, nor is it affected by locality;
the disease occurs in hot, warm, temperate, and cold climates, and in
every possible location on the earth. But it is undoubtedly most
prevalent in temperate regions, for the reason that it is in these that
modern civilization, with all its faults and foibles, is most highly
developed.

The subject of the topical distribution of cancer, or its occurrence in
certain regions, has been the subject of much controversy in England and
France especially, and to read certain statements one would be inclined
to believe that certain telluric conditions were of influence in its
production, as along certain water courses, etc. But a more careful
analysis of all these statements shows that such elements can act only
as contributing causes, as, for instance, through a rheumatic influence,
which is known to be found in so many cancer patients.

The same may be said in regard to so-called “cancer houses” concerning
which there are still occasional references. A careful investigation of
these houses has commonly found them to be old, moldy, damp, badly
ventilated, and otherwise unsanitary; also that such old houses are
commonly tenanted by old people in succession, so that there are more at
a cancer age to be affected. With our present knowledge of the causes
which lead up to cancer we cannot but conclude, therefore, that the
occurrence of the disease in groups, with some apparent connection, has
been only the result of all living under the same conditions of ill
health, including wrong diet, etc.; for we know that cancer is not
contagious or infectious, and there is no other reasonable explanation
which can be sustained.

FOOD AND MODE OF LIFE.—In my former lectures I presented very fully the
evidence that cancer was certainly a disease of civilization, its
frequency and mortality advancing steadily in proportion as various
tribes or peoples, previously exempt, have come more or less under its
influence and adopted its manners and customs.

When we speak, therefore, of the influence of food in the production of
cancer it must be understood that it is not claimed that the diseased
process depends wholly and exclusively on the character of the food,
including drink, taken. In my former lectures I tried to show that
cancer was the result of a deranged nutrition, and we know that one of
the greatest elements in inducing this latter is erroneous metabolism,
depending again on the diet, to a very great extent. In a later lecture
I shall hope to develop this subject further, and indicate more
completely than on the previous occasion, the elements of causation and
the measures which can be successful in overcoming the disease.

In order to understand rightly the rôle which diet may have in the
production of cancer I may have to briefly repeat, more or less, some of
the matters brought forward in my lectures two years ago, and shall
treat of the correction of diet in a later lecture.

We understand, of course, that the body is a vast laboratory, wherein,
by exceedingly complicated processes, material from the outside world is
appropriated to the needs of the economy, and after its use is cast out
in very different and elementary forms. To effect the various changes
necessary in this material we have a very considerable number of what
are called organs of secretion and excretion, whose functions are
combined and correlated in a marvelous manner, which is even yet very
imperfectly understood.

The actual biochemical processes by means of which the transformation of
external food elements into living tissue and force, physical and
mental, takes place are known as: 1. Anabolism, or the process of
assimilation of nutritive matter and its conversion into living
substance; and 2. Catabolism, or the breaking down of complex bodies of
living matter into waste products of simpler chemical composition. These
together constitute 3. Metabolism, or the sum of the chemical changes
whereby the function of nutrition is effected. The actual procedure by
which most of these activities is carried on is one of oxidation, by
means of the oxygen supplied largely by the lungs, which constitutes
about 65 per cent of the human body.

Now to make up for the daily waste of the other 15 elements, which form
35 per cent of the body tissues, and to support the necessary activities
of the system, mental and physical, it is necessary every day to take a
more or less even supply of substances, which we call food and drink,
which should contain about the proper proportion of the requisite bodily
components. Under normal conditions of healthy living the appetite
ordinarily serves as a proper guide for health in man and beast, serving
to regulate the selection of material to preserve the balance of
nutrition. But man especially has temptations to gratify the _taste_,
which is quite a different thing from satisfying the _appetite_, and all
are familiar with the many forms of disaster and disease which arise
from gratifying the taste in food and drink; moreover, the temptations
to this seem to increase continually with the so-called refinements of
civilization.

The actual nutritive elements which are required are relatively few, and
fall mainly under three classes: 1, Protein; 2, Carbohydrates; and 3,
Fats. Of these the latter two furnish most of the 18 per cent of carbon
in the body, and the animal or vegetable protein furnishes the nitrogen,
which forms only about 3 per cent of the body tissues: all these
substances are, of course, used up constantly in providing heat and
energy, physical and mental, day by day, the protein being concerned
chiefly in replacing wasted tissue. The combustion of the carbohydrates
and fat is relatively simple, and the waste products pass off
harmlessly, mainly by the lungs, as carbonic acid and water.

But the course of the protein, or nitrogenous and sulphur and other
mineral elements, is quite different. In the anabolism and catabolism of
protein there are a vast number of intermediate changes, and various
products are elaborated which we know to be of great significance in the
system, and which when imperfectly completed are the source of much
disorder and disease in the economy. Of this the gouty state is a
notable example, with a long list of secondary disorders.

But few realize, however, that cancer is another disease which is quite
as striking in its relation to faulty nitrogenous and sulphur
metabolism. In my former lectures I developed this subject pretty fully
and need not repeat it here, but could adduce more recent proof, did
time permit. Suffice to remind you that many independent observers have
recorded very important and significant errors in the nitrogen and
sulphur partition in cancer, both in its early and late stages, some of
which I have verified in hundreds of volumetric urinary analyses. As
these errors are made to disappear by proper dietary and medicinal
treatment the carcinomatous lesions have steadily improved, and in many
cases have disappeared entirely, as I hope to demonstrate in a later
lecture.

We must, therefore, accept the fact that cancer has very close relations
to the elaboration of protein in the system, and the rational deduction
of this is that an overconsumption of nitrogenous food has something, if
not everything, to do with the production of cancer. As yet we know
little or nothing in regard to actual cancer-genesis; no one has ever
demonstrated, and probably no one ever will demonstrate, the absolute
beginning of the change in some normal cell or cells, in the breast or
elsewhere, which eventuates in their taking on the rampant or malignant
feature which we call cancer. But this change does occur, and though the
exact alterations in the polarity of the cells and the disturbance of
their centrosomes and nuclei, which have been described, may not be
perfectly understood, there is some definite cause for their occurrence.
Some have suggested the hypothesis that the mononuclear leukocyte, by
conjugation with disturbed cells, gives them an abnormal reproductive
power by which they eventually develop the tumor and invade other
tissues. But back of all this there is still some activating cause,
which is found in the fluids which bathe every tissue, namely the blood
and lymph, which we shall see later are deranged in cancer.

The fact that with innumerable injuries occurring everywhere and at all
times cancer develops from them very rarely, should teach us something.
We must conclude, therefore, that there is some constitutional
condition, or rather some state of the blood, which nourishes the cells
and which favors this continued malignancy—some fuel which feeds the
malignant process and at the same time induces a progressive lowered
vitality, ending fatally. For we have already seen in these and former
lectures that the local lesion which we call cancer is but one
manifestation or result of a pernicious anemia, which, if not checked,
may end life in a relatively short time.

As cancer is not contagious or infectious, this anemia, with all its
concomitants, including the local trouble which we call cancer, must be
autotoxic, and evidence is strong that it is of a nitrogenous origin. We
look naturally, therefore, to see if there can be found any relationship
between an augmented consumption of protein-bearing food and the steady
increase in cancer mortality which is reported on every side.

England has furnished more fully and for a longer period than any other
country the mortality and dietary statistics of its population, and from
these we can learn a great deal of value in our study.

According to a carefully prepared table by W. R. Williams showing the
total population in England during the years from 1840 to 1905, cancer
deaths had increased from 17.7 per 100,000 population in 1840 to 88.5 in
1905, or five times in numbers, and in 1913 there were 105.5 deaths from
cancer in 100,000 population. During this time the meat consumption had
more than doubled, to 130 pounds per capita in 1904; so that, according
to Williams, it is estimated that among the adult well-to-do population
the per capita meat consumption was from 180 to 330 pounds per year, in
addition to large quantities of game, poultry, eggs, fish, etc.

The United States Report of the Meat Situation, 1916, also furnishes
some valuable information to aid in this inquiry.

The Argentine Republic stands next in the consumption of meat, with 140
pounds per capita, and with a cancer mortality of 91 per 100,000 in
1900.

The United States comes next, with a per capita consumption of meat at
201.1 pounds in 1909 and a death rate from cancer of 73.8 per 100,000 in
that year, which, as previously stated, was 79.4 in 1914 and 81.1 in
1915.

New Zealand exceeds the United States a little, with a meat consumption
in 1902 of 212.5 pounds per capita, and an increase in cancer mortality
from 32 in 1877‒1888 to 60 per 100,000 in 1900 and 71 in 1903. This
increase is mainly among British and other immigrants, whereas the
aborigines, living simple lives, are seldom affected.

Australia stands first in the consumption of meat, with the enormous
rate of 262.6 pounds per capita in 1902, and the increase of deaths from
cancer there is most striking. In 1851 the death rate per 100,000 living
was 14, in 1900, 62.6, and in 1913, 75 per 100,000 living. The most
striking difference is exhibited between those who are native born, who
in 1900 had a cancer death rate of only 22 per 100,000, while the
British born had a mortality from cancer of 203, or nine times as great;
a still higher ratio was found among immigrants of other nationalities.
Those who have written there on the subject ascribe this proclivity to
cancer to the gluttonous habits of immigrants, who have meat for
breakfast, lunch, dinner, tea, and supper (MacDonald, Williams).

Italy, consuming the least quantity of meat, 46.5 pounds per capita, in
1901, has the lowest cancer death rate, but the present meat consumption
cannot be learned. In Italy, however, the mortality from this disease is
steadily rising, from 50.9 per 100,000 in 1860 to 1900 to 63.6 per
100,000 from 1906 to 1910.

But, as I have tried to show you all along, it is some derangement of
metabolism which is at the bottom of neoplastic growths, and that
derangement is not necessarily due to any one single cause, as diet.
There are other elements of disturbance besides the nitrogenous
malassimilation which is due to the intake of an excessive amount of the
proteid of the animal kingdom; for cancer is said to have been seen in
vegetarians, although I have never met with such a case. We know,
however, that some or many articles from the vegetable kingdom, such as
the pulses and some nuts, contain a very large proportion of proteid;
thus dried peas contain 21 per cent, haricot beans 23, lentils 23.2,
dried lima beans 26.4, soy bean flour, 39.5, butternuts 27.9, black
walnuts 27.6, peanuts 25.8, and almonds 24 per cent of proteid, all more
than is contained in beef and mutton. Thus a large supply of any of
these might produce the same error in the blood stream as that induced
by meat.

In my former lectures I pointed out also that coffee and alcohol were
found by statistics and clinical experience to have a prejudicial effect
on cancer, and therefore must be considered as elements in its
production. In a later lecture I shall deal more specifically with these
matters, in reference to the prophylaxis and treatment of the disease.

At the present time I will only remind you of what I have so often said
before: that it is the complex of modern civilization, with all its
temptations and errors in regard to eating and drinking, and living,
including the nervous strain felt everywhere, that in some way produces
alterations in nutrition which account for many of our diseases. This
operates through the blood current, which ministers in such a way to the
tissues that under some slight provocation a heterologous growth of
certain tissue cells occurs, with malignant tendencies, instead of the
normal homogeneous and stabile structures which compose healthy tissues;
and this departure from normal cell action we call cancer.




                              LECTURE III
       THE MORTALITY FROM CANCER; ANALYSIS OF SURGICAL STATISTICS


As has been already shown in these and previous lectures, the death rate
from cancer has been steadily and alarmingly increasing in almost every
locality, ever since statistics have been collected. The attempt has
been made from time to time to show that this increase is not real, but
is apparent, and that the error arises from three main causes. These
are: 1. The increased longevity in general, leading to the existence of
more people of the cancerous age; 2. Improved diagnosis; and 3. More
careful death certification.

Time does not allow us to go into this matter very fully, but this
erroneous impression is so widespread, and one so constantly meets it in
conversation, that it is desirable to present briefly the grounds and
proof for an absolute denial of the assertion that there has been very
little or no real increase in the mortality from cancer.

First, it may be stated that most of the arguments quoted against the
correctness of statements regarding the steadily rising death rate of
cancer date back to King and Newsholme, who, in 1893, some twenty-three
years ago, attempted a study of early statistics and drew certain
conclusions from them. This was long before the era of careful research
and reliable diagnosis and statistics, and can have little, if any,
weight. Bashford and Murray in the Second Scientific Report of the
Imperial Cancer Research Fund, in 1905, attempted to show the same
thing. But even this was eleven or twelve years ago, and the utter
fallacy of the sophistical arguments appears in the absolute, steady
increase in the death rate of cancer as shown by official tables from
many countries, and as especially collected and seen in the remarkable
book by Hoffman on “The Mortality from Cancer Throughout the World.”

It is impossible in a brief lecture to give even a faint idea of the
immense and valuable amount of research represented, and consequently
the most useful information furnished in this monumental work; the
material is taken from original documents with new information, freshly
obtained from original sources. All is given with an impartiality and
clearness which are refreshing when compared with some recent writings
on the subject. With the immense accumulated data on record, some of
which will be referred to, all showing a steady rise of mortality up to
the present time, and that during a period of especial study of cancer
such as the world has never known before, it is quite unreasonable and
impossible to believe that this advance is only apparent, and that it is
influenced by the three suppositions mentioned. While accuracy of
diagnosis may be important in early cancer, it is certain that in late
stages and at death, from which the various mortality tables are taken,
there is rarely any question as to the diagnosis. There is evidence,
however, to show that cancer is increasing even more rapidly than
appears from mortality statistics.

In 1900 the recorded mortality from cancer in the registration area of
the United States was 63 per 100,000 living, and in 1914 it had risen to
79.4, or an increase of 16.4 per 100,000 living, or over 26 per cent.
While in 1915 there were 54,584 deaths from cancer against 52,420 in
1914 in the registration area of the United States, or 2,164 more
deaths. The total number of deaths in the entire United States is
estimated at about 80,000 last year. The death rate in 1915 was 81.1 per
100,000, or a rise of over 28.7 per cent since 1910. The increase during
this past year has been 1.7 per 100,000 living, while the gross increase
for the preceding five years was but 5.6 per 100,000, or less than an
average of 1.2 per 100,000 each year. So that the great activity in
cancer education and in operative surgery during that year has succeeded
in raising the death rate from cancer by .5 per 100,000 over the average
of the preceding five years!

It is to be noted that this increasing mortality from cancer has been
steady and constant, though with slight diminution occasionally, some
years ago, before the great activity in cancer research, cancer control,
and cancer surgery. All this would certainly indicate some deep-seated
cause of the malady which had not been recognized; indeed the mortality
during the last five years was as follows: 1911, 74.3; 1912, 77; 1913,
78.9; 1914, 79.4; and in 1915, 81.1 per 100,000.

It may be of interest to know that the mortality from cancer varies very
greatly in different portions of the United States, and it would be
instructive to investigate the cause; but the data for this do not
exist. The highest death rate for 1914 was in Vermont, 109.9; Maine had
107.6; Massachusetts, 101.8; New Hampshire, 100.8; California, 97.9; all
against the general average of 79.4 per 100,000 inhabitants in the
registered area of the United States. The lowest among the registration
States was Utah, with 45.8 per 100,000 living. In New York State the
deaths from cancer in 1914 were 88 per 100,000 population in the cities
and 96.1 in rural districts.

Many cities, of course, show a higher death rate from cancer than the
average, owing in part to the number of patients coming for treatment,
and also to the more complex life of the cities, with the greater
temptations leading to the disturbances of metabolism causing cancer.
Thus, the average of twenty large cities gives a rise in death rate of
cancer from 48.6 from 1881 to 1885, to 89.3 per 100,000 living in 1913.

The following table gives the average cancer mortality from 1906 to 1910
per 100,000 in certain American cities:

                       San Francisco        102.5
                       Boston                99.4
                       Providence            96.9
                       Los Angeles           94.9
                       Cincinnati            93
                       Hartford              91.9
                       New Haven             89.8
                       Dayton                88.5
                       Rochester             88.2
                       Springfield           86.9
                       District of Columbia  86
                       Baltimore             85.8
                       Omaha                 85.7
                       Buffalo               84
                       New Orleans           82.2
                       Philadelphia          81.9
                       Hoboken               80.7
                       Columbus              79.5
                       Manhattan and Bronx   78.4
                       St. Louis             78.4
                       Denver                77.9
                       Newark                76.9
                       Chicago               76.5
                       Greater New York      74.1
                       Richmond              73.9
                       Kansas City, Mo       71.1
                       St. Paul              71.1
                       Indianapolis          70.4
                       Borough of Brooklyn   68.9
                       Milwaukee             68.4
                       Nashville             68
                       Pittsburgh            66.4
                       Minneapolis           65.3
                       Detroit               64.5
                       Cleveland             62.9
                       Louisville            61.1
                       Jersey City           60.5
                       Charleston            53.6
                       Seattle               50.2
                       Augusta (Ga.)         49.1
                       Memphis               48.7
                       Savannah              47.1

In the city of New York, as given by the Board of Health Bulletin, there
were from July 1, 1915, to June 30, 1916, 4,672 deaths from cancer, or
an average of just 12.8 persons per day; in the last six months, July 1
to December 31, there were 2,264 deaths from cancer, 990 males and 1,274
females, with a daily average of a little higher than last year.

It is readily understood that many factors enter into the study and
proper understanding of the statistics of cancer, such as age, sex,
location of the lesion, etc., and the limits of a lecture do not permit
any adequate presentation of the subject, but a few points may be
mentioned.

Thus, in regard to age, the States which represented the greatest number
of deaths from cancer, Vermont with 109.9 and Maine with 107.6, show
that the proportion of individuals over 45 years of age was over 27 per
cent, compared with 17.7 per cent for Kentucky and 16.2 per cent for
Montana, which latter gave almost the lowest mortality from cancer.

The same is true somewhat in regard to sex, although sufficient data are
not at hand to show the relative number of living males and females in
the different States. We know, of course, that the great preponderance
of cancer in females is due to that affecting the breast and uterus, and
where females preponderate in the population the total cancer mortality
would be the highest.

The location of the lesion has also a bearing upon the understanding of
statistics. Thus in Norway, for some unexplained reason, cancer of the
stomach caused the great mortality of 60 per cent (66.9 males, 52.9
females) of all cancer mortality, while cancer of the breast caused but
7.6 and of the uterus 16.2 per cent of the whole, the general rate being
93.9 per 100,000 inhabitants. In the United States, in 1914, cancer of
the stomach and liver caused the deaths of 37.9, cancer of the breast
10, and cancer of the female genital organs 14.2 per cent of all deaths
from cancer.

There are other points also to be taken under consideration in
connection with cancer statistics which we cannot even touch on and can
only mention one, namely, the physical condition; for the disease is
known to be more frequent proportionately among the better nourished and
well-to-do classes, etc.

Turning to other countries, we find abundant confirmation of the
persistent and considerable increase in the mortality from cancer, in
many cases much greater than has occurred in the United States; and in
nearly all of them the increase can be recognized as commensurate with
the progress or advance of so-called civilization, especially as
emphasized in city life.

England and Wales afford us about the most satisfactory statistics in
this regard. W. R. Williams has given a valuable table, already referred
to in connection with food, showing the prevalence of cancer and its
relative increase in England and Wales from 1840 to 1905. In 1840 the
cancer death rate was 17.7 per 100,000 living, with a proportion of 1 to
129 of total deaths. The deaths from cancer increased with almost a
perfect regularity until in 1905 there was a mortality of 88.5 per
100,000 living, and 1 in 17 of the total deaths was due to cancer, as
against 1 to 129 in 1840. The total proportion of deaths from all causes
is given for each year, and while the population has only a little more
than doubled in these 65 years, the deaths from cancer have increased
from 2,786 to 30,221, or over ten times the number; the rate of cancer
deaths per 100,000 living had increased five times, while the ratio of
deaths from cancer to total deaths had multiplied more than seven times.
Since 1905 the cancer death rate in England and Wales has advanced to
99.3 per 100,000 in 1911, and to 105.5 in 1913, and in London the cancer
mortality is 114.9 per 100,000 population.

Statistics from other countries, collected by Hoffman, show the same
steady increase. I will not weary you with much more of statistical
detail, but it is interesting to record a few of the more striking
facts, illustrating the universal increase in the cancer death rate
during these later years of cancer research and active surgery. The data
are from 1896 to 1910, and the countries will be arranged according to
proportionate increase in the death rate per 100,000 population. Thus,
Ireland comes first, with an increase of 20.7, which is explained in
part by the emigration of younger persons, leaving more of the cancer
age; next comes Denmark, increased from 118.9 to 137.3, or 18.4 per
100,000 population; then the German Empire with an increase of 13.4;
Hungary, 12.9; Italy, 12.7; Holland, 11.6; Norway, 10.9; Austria, 9.4;
and France from 97.3 to 102.7, or only 5.4 per 100,000 population.
During this same period the deaths from cancer in the United States have
increased about 18 per 100,000, or almost as much as the highest of the
countries mentioned.

In regard to the bearing of all these figures upon the alleged apparent
and not real increase of cancer, I may quote from Hoffman: “The evidence
is so convincing” as to the reality of the increase of cancer “that it
may be safely maintained that no other statistical conclusion in
medicine is so concisely and incontrovertibly established as this: in
any event, no satisfactory evidence is available to successfully
contradict this conclusion at the present time. If all this evidence,
however, is inconclusive and worthless, then no alternative remains but
to discredit the statistical returns of every country in the world with
regard to any single disease or group of diseases, although the returns
are accepted as approximately accurate in regard to every other
important cause of death.”

[Illustration:

  Death Rate per 100000 Population
  From United States Mortality Statistics 1915
]

In order that the real increase in the mortality from cancer may be
readily understood, the accompanying chart (now hanging before you) has
been copied from that given in the volume of the United States Mortality
Statistics for 1914, and it will help to visualize what has just been
stated. The data for 1915 have been added through the courtesy of Mr.
Rogers, Director of the Census, in a personal communication.

The striking fact brought out in this chart is the comparison between
the steadily diminishing death rate of tuberculosis, through careful
medical supervision, and the steadily increasing death rate of cancer,
under surgical care. While the mortality of tuberculosis has fallen from
201.9 persons in 1900 to 145.8 in 1915, or 56.1 less deaths in each
100,000 population, or over 27.7 per cent, the cancer death rate has
risen in the same time from 63 to 81.1 per 100,000, or over 28.7 per
cent. They have therefore approached each other by 56.4 per cent, and
unless this rate of progression is changed in some way, the lines will
have crossed one another in less than fifteen years more, even as that
for organic heart disease has already crossed that of tuberculosis, it
having risen almost 27 per cent.

Another interesting lesson to be drawn from this chart is that the death
rate from organic heart disease, nephritis, and apoplexy have all risen
coincidently with that of cancer, only that the rate of the latter has
outstripped them all. If we accept the fact that the increasing death
rate of these three diseases is largely the result of modern
civilization, especially from erroneous eating and drinking, it would
appear that cancer is due to the same cause.

Realizing, then, that the mortality of cancer is materially and steadily
rising, in spite of most diligent research by innumerable honest and
capable scientists, with the expenditure of vast sums of money and
countless animal lives, and in spite of the work of ardent, earnest, and
capable surgeons, who have failed to stay the terrible progress of the
disease, let us briefly study some of the reported statistics in regard
to the results of operative interference in cancer.

It may be first stated that this is a most difficult task, so different
are the reports from different surgeons. There are many elements which
affect the statistics relating to the surgery of cancer. First of these
is, perhaps, the stage of the disease at which the operation is
performed. Second, the results vary, of course, immensely with the
knowledge and skill of the operator and the excellence of the technique.
Third, the class of cases operated on has much to do with favorable or
unfavorable results reported. Fourth, the length of observation after
operation is always to be considered in connection with surgical
statistics. Finally, the optimism of the reporter must be regarded in
weighing the true value of reports as to ultimate results. We will
briefly consider these points.

First, as to the stage of the disease at which the operation was
performed. We have seen in this and previous lectures that the lesion
which we call cancer is but a _result_ of a deranged blood state, and is
not a purely local process, a something simply to be removed surgically
in order to have the patient get well and remain well. For one sees
plenty of cases where there were recurrences even after the very
earliest operations possible. But the claims put forth that favorable
results are conditioned on very early operations are so strenuous and
persistent that we must believe that a measure of the favorable results
can be thus accounted for. We know, of course, that very late in the
disease operations are out of the question. It is a little curious,
however, that most of the pictures shown, statistics presented, and
arguments adduced by these ardent advocates of early operation relate to
cancer of the skin, especially about the face, which cause hardly 2 per
cent of all the deaths from cancer in various countries; whereas those
who see much of cutaneous epithelioma know that if properly handled it
is generally a comparatively mild affair and relatively easily cured
without surgical operation, as you have so constantly seen in this
clinic in past years. But mortality statistics are greatly influenced by
the class of cases which the operator takes, and so if epithelioma of
the skin is included, the ratio of cures will be high. Selected cases
also always give more favorable statistics.

Second, the knowledge and skill of the operator and the perfection of
technique undoubtedly influence surgical statistics. The ordinary
practitioner or surgeon cannot hope for as favorable results in many
operations on cancer as can those who are past masters in this line, and
these latter are the ones who furnish the favorable statistics.

Third, the class of cases operated on affects surgical statistics very
greatly. While epithelioma of the face, and even of the lip, when well
removed, may yield most favorable statistics, cancer of the breast,
uterus, stomach, intestines, gall bladder, etc., yield increasingly
unfavorable statistics, as will be presently seen.

Fourth, the duration of observation after operation affects very
seriously the validity of statistics. Not long ago three years’ freedom
from disease was considered the time to regard a cancer as permanently
cured; but this time has been lengthened more and more, by the
observation of any number of cases where the disease has recurred even
long afterwards, and reliable observers are now very chary in expressing
an opinion as to the final cure of a cancer. This will be more fully
considered in another lecture.

Finally, the optimism of the reporter seems often to have something to
do with the reliability of surgical statistics. This need hardly be
discussed. The older and more experienced the surgeon the less confident
he is of having actually cured cancer with the knife. At a discussion in
the New York Academy of Medicine, some years ago, Dr. Robert F. Weir
said that the late Dr. Agnew, a celebrated surgeon of Philadelphia, had
remarked, just before his death, that he doubted if he had ever been
justified in an operation upon cancer, and he, Dr. Weir, stated that he
could almost say the same.

Turning now to the actual statistics of operative surgery on cancer, we
will find that the percentage of reported cures varies very greatly, in
accordance with the points just stated. It is understood, of course,
that no accurate statements can be made from statistics in reference to
the actual mortality of cancer in any location, partly owing to the
paucity of figures, and partly because the stages and extent of the
disease differ so greatly, and the results vary with the previous
duration of the lesion and the period of observation after the
operation.

Cancer of the skin presents the best operative statistics of any region,
and the claim is made that all cases are curable if operated on early
enough and rightly. While this is not wholly true, it is certain that if
all lesions which one chooses to call “pre-cancerous” are thoroughly
extirpated very early, and included in the statistics, the percentage of
cures can be reported as very high. So that it may be said that, taking
all statistics together, including very small as well as large lesions,
the favorable results, that is permanent cures of lesions which can be
truly called cutaneous epithelioma, may run as high as 75 per cent. But
against this is to be set the fact that a very large share of these
cases, taken early and by competent persons, are equally amenable to
cure by lighter measures, without the horrible disfigurement which one
sometimes sees after purely surgical procedures.

Cancer of the lip, when taken early and treated radically, including
gland extirpation, also yields a fairly satisfactory result, depending,
of course, on the stage of the disease, or amount of involvement of
tissue and glands, and the completeness of the operation. But while some
operators have claimed 75 per cent of cures, Hertzler makes the
percentage of permanent cures not much over 25 per cent. And here again,
if taken very early and treated correctly, many of these cases yield
without the knife, whereas very late cases may be practically
inoperable.

When, however, we come to cancer within the mouth, the tongue, etc., it
is quite a different story, and the end results of surgery are commonly
unsatisfactory. Certain European surgeons have reported an operative
mortality in cancer of the tongue as high as 36 per cent, while
recurrences are the rule, and really permanent cures the very great
exception.

As before stated, it is extremely difficult to give any true and
accurate estimate of the real end results from operative surgery as
ordinarily performed in cancer affecting various regions. The obvious
reason of this is that most of our statistics are from those who are
especially occupied with the disease under most favorable hospital
facilities, and also certain statistics may be from selected cases;
moreover, operators are naturally inclined to report mainly satisfactory
results, while the other aspect of the case is seldom presented. Aside,
then, from superficial epitheliomata, about the only locations in which
there is even a fair chance for the patient under the knife are the
breast, uterus, and rectum, and for these large statistics are
available; but again these are unsatisfactory, as they vary so greatly.

The reported statistics of cancer of the breast are very provoking.
Individual operators have claimed as high as 50 and even 70 per cent of
cures (Rodman). Murphy, on the other hand, on a basis of end results
states that the plump woman invariably succumbs, and that Paget’s
disease ends fatally in 90 per cent of cases. Hildebrand mentions 606
operations in which the percentage of permanent cures varied from 15 to
23 per cent; late recurrence is not uncommon in cancer of the breast. He
thinks that 35 per cent is the maximum possibility for permanent cures.
He would be very suspicious of any higher figure. Judd reports that of
266 cases of carcinoma of the breast in the Mayo Clinic, which could be
traced, 39.8 per cent were reported as alive at the end of five years,
although there was recurrence in 6 cases.

Lubhardy, in an article on recurrence, in 1902, states that 1,321
recurrences were known to have occurred after 2,107 operations, or
nearly 63 per cent, 4 per cent of which were late recurrences; he does
not mention the number “cured” nor the number of patients untraced.
Unfavorable results in breast cancer are seldom published. Dr. H. C. Coe
in a discussion quotes the experience of a friend who had operated on
between 200 and 300 cases of cancer of the breast with exactly 13
recoveries.

Levin (_Med. Record_, Jan. 27, 1917, p. 175) has recently made some
startling statements in regard to the recurrence of carcinoma after
breast operations. While granting that early cases without lymphatic
involvement yielded good results, he states that these represented at
the utmost only 25 per cent of the cases operated on: 75 per cent were
advanced cases with involvement of the skin and lymph glands. Of these
barely 25 per cent could be cured by radical operation, and in 52 per
cent of the advanced cases operated on metastases appeared in distant
organs without local recurrences. The longer the period after the
operation the greater was the number of recurrences.

He quoted Heurtaux, a French surgeon, who had followed up 284 cases
which he himself had operated on during the previous 20 years. H. stated
that four years after operation 43 per cent remained free of the
disease, eight years after only 16 per cent, and 20 years after only 2.5
remained free from the disease. There were a great many cases of
carcinoma of the breast reported in which the patient died from
metastasis in different organs without local recurrence 10, 15, and 20
years after the operation. The late metastases most frequently took
place in the skeleton, which was due to the fact that skeletal lesions
might continue a long time without causing clinical symptoms.

Dr. Levin confirmed the skeletal involvement by roentgenograms of ten
cases of carcinoma of the breast observed during the last two years, in
which it was found that the metastases must have been present at the
time of operation.

Dr. Willy Meyer in the discussion said that physicians had long been too
prone to consider carcinoma a local disease, and when he found signs of
metastatic infection he never felt that he could expect anything from an
operation.

We can only state with Hartwell and others that every especially
favorable series of cancer cases, and this applies particularly to the
breast, should be subject to close scrutiny. Why did this or that
operator get marvelous results and an equally efficient man get very
poor ones?

There are also many factors to be considered. How many cases were of the
senile or scirrhous type? How many of the tumors removed were proved
microscopically to be cancer? If one operates radically on every tumor
or swelling in the breast, however small, the end results will, of
course, be more favorable; for undoubtedly many innocent lesions,
chronic mastitis, adenoma, cystic tumors, etc., are often removed
unnecessarily. The question also arises as to what was the after care,
and what steps were taken to prevent recurrence? In view of the
statement of Hildebrand, just quoted, that 35 per cent is the maximum
possibility for permanent cure, and considering the terrible pain and
miserable death one so constantly sees in recurrences, it really becomes
a question as to the advisability of surgical interference.

The opinion has been expressed more than once by those who have watched
the disease, that if left alone, with ordinary medical care, the entire
average of 100 cases would be better, as to length of life and
suffering, than if submitted to operation. I shall hope to show you in a
later lecture that a greater proportion of breast tumors, diagnosed as
cancer by competent surgeons, have recovered completely for years, under
proper dietary and medical care than the percentage yielded by operative
procedure.

There is a wealth of statistics regarding operations for cancer of the
cervix uteri. Despite the figures obtained by radical operators like
Wertheim, the vast majority of those surgeons who practise either
vaginal or abdominal hysterectomy have obtained far inferior results to
those of Byrne, with his cautery, which is still in use. Wertheim once
reported the astonishing figure of 61 per cent of 5‒year recoveries. In
a later report, however, Wertheim stated that only about one half of the
cases that come to him are operable, and of these about one half are
cured by operation, that is, about 25 per cent of all cases. But
experience shows that if these cases could be followed up there would be
very many late recurrences. The claims of Wertheim and others must be
offset, however, by the high operative mortality reported by many; as
the cases must have been incipient in order to be operable, it is
possible that Byrne with his cautery could have done nearly as well, and
Byrne never lost a patient. But Klein of Munich, by circular letters
compiled many statistics, and concluded that the percentage of cure was
but 4.5 per cent, and Klein himself obtained only 3.6 per cent. Reinecke
asserted that only 10 per cent of cases of cancer of the cervix can be
cured.

Fredrick (_Trans. Gynæcol. Soc._, 1905, p. 136) collected the records of
500 hysterectomies for cancer of the cervix performed by prominent
colleagues and himself. Of this entire material there had been but 13
five-year cures. In discussion Henrotin stated that he had practically
given up abdominal hysterectomy. Currier stated that surgery was a
failure as a cure for cancer.

At an earlier session of the Society, 1900, in a discussion of Pryor’s
paper, Van de Warker asserted that surgery had done nothing for cancer;
Lapthorne Smith said that many women did better if left alone. J. Byrne
stated that hysterectomy for cancer was a crime. Engleman thought that
cancers left alone may insure a longer survival than those treated
surgically.

In a discussion before the same Society in 1896 (on Byrne’s paper)
vaginal hysterectomy was discussed. While Boldt, Dudley, and Baldy
claimed excellent results, Segond is known to have had but 5 relative
cures (2‒5 years) in 80 cases. Mundé saw a rapid return in all his 25
cases. Polk had recurrence in every one of 50 cases. Byrne collected
notes of 283 operations by ten men, and the results were as follows:
died, 7 per cent; life prolonged, 11 per cent; and became worse, 82 per
cent.

In the Transactions for 1912 (Discussion of Neal’s paper, Wertheim’s
operation) Bovee stated that only 10 per cent of cancers of the cervix
were operable. Polak had no survivors from operations, although four
were living from Byrne’s cautery method. Chalfant had 3 cures (6 years)
in 30 cases. In general the saving of life was offset by the high
operative mortality. Later I shall report two remarkable cases of very
extensive cancer of the cervix which have entirely recovered, with
normal cervix, without operation.

In regard to operative results in cancer of the stomach there are
relatively few satisfactory statistics. W. J. Mayo reported recently
(Levin, Hoffman “Statistics of Mortality,” etc., 1915, p. 210) on 996
cases of carcinoma of the stomach. Of these 344 cases only were operable
and of the latter 25 per cent remained cured five years and over, after
operation. In other words, about 9 per cent of cases of carcinoma of the
stomach can be cured by surgery at the hands of Mayo, how much less in
the hands of most other surgeons? Against such success must be opposed
the analysis of 1,000 cases of cancer of the stomach by Friedenwald
(_Amer. Jour. Med. Sci._, November, 1914). He states “of the entire
number, operations were performed in 266 instances; of these there is
not one patient living.” But few lived more than a year after operation;
the majority died within the first six months.

In cancer of the gall bladder several good operators have reported that
there have been absolutely no good results.

In cancer of the rectum there is a high operative mortality and very
questionable ultimate curative results; indeed, there are very few
reliable statistics in regard to this. In 27 perineal and sacral
operations Mayo reports 7 per cent primary mortality, and in 44
abdominal and combined abdominal and perineal operations 20 per cent
operative mortality. Tuttle reports a higher operative mortality. While
there are no available data in regard to the duration of life after
operation, it is well known that the disease usually recurs, and in many
a colostomy is performed, with all its distressing features and very
intangible results.

Time does not admit, nor is it necessary for me to go further into the
brave but futile attempts which have been made by surgeons to cure such
cases of cancer as can be reached by the knife, which, as we have seen
by the testimony of many foremost in their ranks, has been found
ineffective to a very great degree. In addition to the locations just
mentioned there are many others where the attempt has been made to
eradicate the disease surgically, but either with results quite as
unsatisfactory as those mentioned, or much worse. Thus cancer of the
tongue, palate, esophagus, cardiac orifice of stomach, liver, gall
bladder, pancreas, small intestine, bladder prostate, etc., also of the
brain and spinal cord, are most unfavorable, and both the operative
mortality and end results are disheartening. All surgeons agree that at
least 50 per cent of all cancers are inoperable, so that in all the
reports concerning the results of operations this must be taken into
consideration, and the real percentage of cures of cancer by surgery
must be divided into at least one half. Thus, if operative surgery
yields an average of 25 per cent of apparent cures in all cases operated
on, this would mean only 12.5 per cent of all cases of cancer. This,
considering the late recurrences often not traced, bears out the
commonly received opinion that about 90 per cent of all patients once
attacked by cancer die of the disease.

Surely the outlook for surgery, borne out by the steadily rising general
mortality from cancer, is most unpromising, and one naturally turns to
medicine, to know if there is not some means of modifying the system so
that there shall not be this tendency to malignant tissue change, so
destructive to life. In my former lectures I attempted to show that all
experience and biochemical laboratory studies looked this way, and in a
later lecture I shall hope to show that by dietary, hygienic, and
medicinal measures the disease can be and has been checked repeatedly,
and cancer cured without surgical operation. The permanence of the cure
depends, of course, upon the continued faithful adherence of the patient
to the means and measures which caused the dissipation of the tumor. For
no one can doubt but that, if the real cause is met and kept in check by
prolonged proper measures, the disease will not and cannot redevelop.

Do not misunderstand me and think that I claim that each and every case
of cancer, in any stage, can be cured. Alas, my sad experience with the
many deaths from recurrent and inoperable cancer, especially in the New
York Skin and Cancer Hospital, has taught me the contrary, and I have
often been appalled at the impotence of human endeavor; although even
these patients have often been grateful for the amount of benefit and
relief afforded by proper measures, and in my former lectures I reported
to you several such cases. But I do assert that the total percentage of
cures in reasonable cases is far, far greater under the line of
treatment I am presenting to you than under that most commonly employed.




                               LECTURE IV
    INOPERABLE AND RECURRENT CANCER; METASTASIS; THE BLOOD IN CANCER


We saw in our last lecture that surgery had failed to check the rising
mortality of cancer, and that during the year 1915, in the United States
Registration Area, the death rate had augmented from 79.4 to 81.1, or an
increase of 1.7 persons in every 100,000 living; this was a greater
increase than the average rise in the death rate for the preceding five
years which was only 1.2 points. This, moreover, occurred during a still
active period of laboratory research, with wide publicity as to cancer
control, by education as to the benefit of early operation, and with
active and skilful surgery.

We saw that fully 50 per cent of all cases of cancer were quite
inoperable when first seen by competent surgeons, while the average end
result, or cure, in the cases operated on, for all kinds together, good
and bad, slight and severe, did not total as much as 25 per cent; this
makes but 12.5 of the entire number who applied for surgical relief. We
quite naturally asked, therefore, if some form of medical treatment,
including diet and hygiene, could not afford a better prospect of
arresting this fearful mortality. It is especially in regard to the
large number of inoperable and recurrent cases, comprising over 60 per
cent of the whole, that this inquiry is particularly important. We will
briefly consider these latter sad conditions.

Looked at from its broadest aspect, in connection with what I have tried
to show here and on former occasions, all cancer will be inoperable, or
rather, not needing operations, when the principles I have tried to
develop are fully elaborated by the wide experience of others, and when
they are firmly established, and correctly carried out. For when it is
universally realized that it is the errors of life, determined and
accentuated by advanced civilization, so-called, which lead up to and
cause cancer, and when public education has been advanced along correct
lines, the tendency to cancer will diminish and there will be fewer
cases, either operable or inoperable. The former will melt away under
correct internal and external measures, and the latter will be helped
by, or slowly yield to the same, unless the malignant process has
already progressed beyond the possibility of retrogressive metabolism.
But, of course, it is too much to expect that such longed for results
will be fully attained within a generation or two.

INOPERABLE CANCER is truly a most distressing condition, especially
after it has become so after one or more surgical operations. The
hopelessness and despair of the patient when told that no operation is
possible is bad enough. But when with recurrence, time and again after
repeated operations, it is decided that no further relief by the knife
is possible, the despondency is indeed pitiful—especially as ordinarily
one can only look forward to a sure and most painful death, at a not
very distant day. It is very difficult to convince many of these
patients that medical treatment, including diet, can do any good, so
firmly fixed is the idea that an operation is the only possible remedy;
many, therefore, get weary of the restraint necessary when immediate
results are not seen. And yet in my previous lectures I gave several
such cases to show that much can be done medically along these lines,
even in these distressing cases, and later shall hope to narrate other
instances, similar to those reported in my lectures two years ago.

It is undoubtedly true that some of these cases which are inoperable
when first seen could have been operated on at a much earlier period,
with as much success as follows in those in which this is tried. But we
have already seen in the last lecture how small a proportion of these
selected cases survive a long time; for we have yet to find statistics
regarding those who have been traced even as long as ten years. In my
previous lectures I reported concerning two patients with undoubted
cancer of the breast who had been watched for sixteen years, with no
trace of the trouble remaining, and two others who had been seen each
for nine years; these latter have been watched since, and have been seen
recently, eleven years after beginning treatment, with the same results,
all without operation. These cases had all been diagnosed as undoubted
cancer by competent surgeons, some eminent, and had refused operation,
which had been urged. Later I shall hope to relate other similar
instances of early cancer.

Inoperable cancer, comprising at least 50 per cent of all cases applying
to the surgeon, presents many features of interest and worthy of
consideration. The reasons for inoperability may be grouped as follows:

1. Those occurring in regions quite inaccessible, as in the brain,
esophagus, liver, pancreas, etc.

2. Those otherwise accessible, but which have advanced too far before
seeking surgical relief, occurring in many locations.

3. Those in accessible regions where experience has shown that
recurrence is pretty sure to take place, such as advanced cases in the
oral cavity, bladder, prostate, etc.

4. Those which have recurred after repeated operations, with extensive
spreading of the disease, as in many cases of the breast, uterus, etc.

5. Those with already very great metastatic involvement, in many
regions, presenting a true carcinosis.

6. Those in close proximity to or involving vital organs, blood vessels,
ureters, etc.

7. Those in which there are other reasons, such as advanced age, lowered
vitality, great cachexia, etc.

8. Those who absolutely refuse to be treated with the knife.

There is no necessity of troubling you with details as to the character
or appearance of inoperable cancer, which are dwelt on in standard
works, as our study relates rather to the causes of the disease and the
means of arresting its progress.

Nor need I dwell much further on this distressing aspect of cancer, for
I believe that all see the necessity of seeking some other measures than
operative surgery to aid in solving the question of relieving the
present condition of affairs. It is for this mass of otherwise hopeless
cases that any reasonable method of treatment is worthy of serious
consideration, both for the measure of relief which may be secured along
many lines by exactly the proper care, and especially for the
possibilities of its value in regard to prophylaxis.

Unfortunately it must be acknowledged that many claims, quack and other,
have been put forth in times past for remedies and measures which would
control or remove, and even cure, the disease in all stages. But the
failure of each in turn has very naturally discouraged many from
accepting any new proposition, and the profession and laity have almost
given up the hope for a real cure of cancer.

In the present instance, however, there is no attempt to present or urge
any single means or measure as a cure-all for cancer. But there has been
an endeavor to study the fundamental causes of the disease along
biochemical lines, and to meet intelligently the errors found. We have
seen cancer developing more and more as the ill effects of modern
civilization have manifested themselves, and have found that its
increase has kept pace coincidently with and even exceeded that shown by
certain other diseases, cardiac, arterial, and renal, which are
recognized as due to errors of living; and there is every reason to
believe that cancer is of the same origin. In a later lecture I shall
hope to show how some of these errors may be overcome, with the
consequent cessation of the cancerous process and even the disappearance
of the malignant lesion already formed.

RECURRENT CANCER represents only the continuance and further operation
of the internal or systemic causes which induced the formation and
development of the first lesion, and are a natural sequence therefrom.
Otherwise why should there be such an almost universal tendency of the
disease to redevelop either in the same or other localities? It is
granted, of course, that the very complete ablation of an early tumor
and its surroundings removes a focus in which disease has started, and
from which is generated a hormone or poison which tends to further lower
the vitality of the blood. But this does not by any means reach the
basic cause, as we saw in the former lectures.

In estimating, however, the real value of an operative procedure, which
has seemed to be successful for some period of time, we must also
inquire if there has not been some other cause which may account for the
absence of further cancerous deposits? It is more than likely, in
successful cases, that the previous occurrence of the disease and the
fear of recurrence have so modified the life of the patient in many
respects, that the primal cause is more or less removed. It is
incredible to believe that the mere removal of the portion of tissue in
which the systemic disorder has localized can forever prevent a new
focus from developing. As well might we expect that the removal of a
gouty toe, a tubercular deposit, or a late syphilitic gumma would
inhibit further manifestations of the disease.

Recurrent cancer, then, is but the result of a continuance of the
operation of the same causes which produced the first local lesion, and
need surprise no one, if those causes are left entirely unchecked and
the system unchanged. Undoubtedly in many instances the recurrence, or
increased production of the disease, is made more certain by the
operation itself; it is also recognized that handling or manipulation
then or at any time may also contribute to this, as may be understood
from the following:

1. Cancer cells, which have a reproductive capacity, may be forced into
the adjoining tissue, or find entrance into blood vessels or lymphatics
severed during operation, and there continue their activity and produce
new lesions.

2. By implantation, cancer cells, already started on their reproductive
career, may be transferred to freshly cut surfaces, and there may
develop new lesions, favored by the continued derangement of the blood
current.

3. Cancer cells may have existed outside of the immediate area which was
removed surgically, and so may continue to develop new lesions, being
further stimulated thereto by the manipulations attending the operation.

4. We know, finally, that the occasional removal of lesions which are
afterwards shown microscopically to be benign, such as adenoma, cysts,
chronic mastitis, etc., will sometimes be followed by the development of
true cancer, which will then pursue a malignant course.

On the occurrence, therefore, of any lump or lesion which might possibly
be or become cancer, the greatest caution should be exercised to avoid
all manipulation, lest a spread of the disease should render it more
rebellious to treatment. For in the medical management of cancer it is
naturally more difficult to cure a patient when there are large numbers
of diseased cells, in one or various locations, which are already giving
forth their poisonous hormone, vitiating the blood stream.

The New York Board of Health has recently inaugurated a service for the
examination of specimens excised from suspected cancer, in order to
establish the diagnosis microscopically before surgical operation. There
could hardly be devised a more effective plan to increase the mortality
from cancer and to render many more cases really inoperable than this
one would surely be; for by thus cutting into cancerous tissue and
opening lymphatic channels and blood vessels, with the opportunity for
absorption of cancerous elements during the necessary delay, metastases
would certainly be induced which would render a surgical removal or a
dietary and medicinal treatment immeasurably less effective. It is to be
hoped that this scheme will be immediately abandoned.

Recurrence of cancer is far more common during the first year after
operation than in any other single year, but, as we shall see shortly,
there is no time limit when the disease may not manifest itself anew. It
is understood, of course, that recurrence depends also largely on the
previous duration, extent, and malignancy of the tumor, and exact
statistics are very few and imperfect in regard to these matters.

It is well known that not long ago three years was considered as the
time at which, if there had been no recurrence, the cancer could be
considered as cured, and very many statistics have been based on this
period. But with further experience and closer observation, and with
more diligent following up cases, it was found that recurrences did take
place more or less frequently at subsequent periods, and now the time
limit has been arbitrarily extended to five years. This is because the
very large proportion of recurrences are in the first year, varying for
different locations and conditions from as high as 50 to 80 per cent in
different statistics.

But as the patients who have lived out the five-year limit are followed
up more carefully, it is found that recurrences do happen all along the
following years, so that they are recorded as occurring 6, 8, 9, 20, and
25 years after operation; I have met with many after 3 or 5 years, and
even as late as 15 years after operation. The vast majority of cases,
however, are not thus accurately followed out, much less reported, and
thus far we have few data on which to make accurate statements as to the
actual permanent cure of cancer by the knife.

Recurrent cancer, as one constantly observes it, is most deplorable, and
many who have had much to do with these cases realize that the distress
is often far greater than in other cases in which the disease has run a
natural course, without operation and under good medical guidance. The
pain attending growths in scar tissue is generally intense and commonly
requires anodynes continually and increasingly; these in turn, by
disturbing digestion and locking up the secretions, seem to augment the
disease. Even with these patients, however, very much may be done to
relieve their suffering by proper dietary and medicinal means, with
suitable local medication, as I have constantly seen, so that opiates
need be but little used.

METASTASES form a very considerable and important element in inoperable
and recurrent cancer, and we will briefly consider these. They occur
mainly through three channels: 1. The lymphatic system; 2. The venous
system; and 3. The arterial system. The permeation theory of Handley
relates to direct extension laterally through lymphatic spaces, and
belongs to the first mentioned means of extension. It is also believed
that metastases may be formed in the peritoneal cavity, and likewise in
the pleural cavity, by direct contact of cancer cells or pieces of
malignant tissue which have gained access to those cavities and have
been carried down by gravity and movement of viscera. They then become
engrafted on healthy tissue and form metastases there.

While holding firmly to the belief that the original cancerous growth
and other foci of disease are developed from a vicious state of the
blood current, there seems to be no reason for doubting that the disease
may also be extended in the manner above indicated. Although cancer
material cannot be inoculated from one person to another, or from a
human being to animals, nor from one species of animal to another,
experience and observation show that the malignant process can be
transferred from one organ or structure of the same individual to
another part or structure, whether there has been a surgical operation
or not.

The lymphatic system is apparently the first means for the spread of the
malignant process, and all are familiar with the lymph nodes seen in the
neighborhood of cancerous masses. It is supposed that these are caused
by the lodgment of detached cells which have taken on the abnormal
reproductive action which characterizes cancer. As with other foreign
bodies, pus cocci, etc., the minute lymphatic glands seek to arrest
their passage into the circulation, and it is probable that some of them
are destroyed there, for the single enlarged gland will often remain for
a long time as the only manifestation of metastasis. In many cases,
where the original cancer has disappeared under dietary and medicinal
treatment, the enlarged glands also disappear, as I have seen many
times.

When the disease is unchecked, however, the glands fail in their
endeavor to protect the system and continue to enlarge one after another
along the line of the lymphatics, and the lymph stream then carries
certain cancer elements through the thoracic duct into the venous
circulation; thence they reach distant parts of the body, through the
arterial system, and, being lodged in capillaries, a more or less
general carcinosis results. Cancer elements can also proliferate along
lymphatic tracts, and, furthermore, they may enter the venous and
arterial systems directly by the invasion of a malignant growth.

All these and other points regarding the metastasis of cancer form a
very interesting study, but time does not permit of further elaboration.
All know that while primary carcinoma of the liver is very rare, its
secondary or metastatic involvement is very common. The bones, lungs,
spleen, kidney, and viscera generally are all often found to be the seat
of metastases, and in general carcinosis, which has lasted some time,
metastases will be found abundantly both in the lymphatics of many parts
of the body and in many organs and tissues. Metastases in the lungs are
not uncommon in breast cancer, as also metastasis in the bones of the
thorax. In the last lecture reference was made to the frequency of
metastases in the skeletal structures of the body, which probably have
much to do with the pernicious anemia which carries off the patient.

An interesting study relates to the extension of the carcinomatous
process in the skin; this occurs at first near, and then around, and
even at a distance from the site of an operation, especially after
removal of the breast. These nodules are at first small, and felt deep
in or below the skin, and are not colored. They steadily increase in
size, and when about that of a small pea, they become red and elevated a
line or so. Later they may appear more numerous and even involve a large
area, forming the so-called _cancer en cuirasse_, and may ulcerate.
Sometimes single lesions of some size may appear here and there, even
some distance from the site of the original tumor, and may not be
colored. While these may represent lymphatic infarctions, it is often
impossible to trace any direct connection with lymph ducts, and they
more probably arise from capillary deposits of cancerous elements. I
have frequently had these scattered cutaneous lesions excised, in cases
under medical treatment, with a view of removing mechanically some of
the foci from which the disease could be spread. The wounds have
invariably healed promptly and perfectly, and no carcinomatous process
has resulted.

The BLOOD IN CANCER has been studied mainly in reference to its solid
constituents, and very little in regard to its plasma; whereas it is
from the plasma that the blood corpuscles are formed, and this is the
principal agent in the development and nutrition of tissues, normal and
malignant. For it is to be remembered that the chyle is discharged
directly into the venous blood current, and the venous radicles absorb
much of the nutritive material directly from the abdominal organs. The
plasma, therefore, carries with it constantly a varying quantity of
partially assimilated material to be oxidized in the lungs, and slowly
purified by the agency of the kidneys; the serum albumen and serum
globulin are also active agents in the formation of tissue, malignant or
other. There is great need of laboratory studies along these lines, and
also on the alkalescence of the blood, which we found to have a marked
diminution in cancer.

We know also comparatively little in regard to the origin and
destruction of the cellular elements of the blood, and can only depend
on the microscopic examination of their forms and appearances in health
and in many conditions of disease. These have been abundantly studied
morphologically, but mainly in the more severe forms and later stages of
cancer, as detailed somewhat in my former lectures. Enough was there
quoted to show the continued degeneracy of the blood after a cancerous
growth had acquired some progress; there has also been observed some
improvement for a while after the removal of a tumor, evidencing the
deleterious effect of the hormone secreted by a cancerous mass.

The laboratory study of the blood from 22 of the cancer patients in the
New York Skin and Cancer Hospital under my care, has been instructive as
well as valuable along certain lines. In most of them it was made
weekly, and often over long periods of time, and the results tabulated
for easy comparison, in order to study closely the condition of the
patient and the effect of remedies. No very startling revelations were
made by these blood studies, they confirmed in the main the observations
of others, though some interesting facts were learned from an analysis
of the data. They referred to ten cases of cancer of the breast, four of
the stomach, two of the uterus, one of the rectum, one of general
abdominal carcinosis, and the rest in scattered locations.

The lowest hemoglobin index was 35, with 2,800,000 red blood cells, in a
woman aged 59 with cancer of the stomach. The next lowest hemoglobin
index was 45, with which the patient, aged 53, died, with inoperable
cancer of the right breast; the blood count showed 3,700,000
erythrocytes, and 10,400 white blood cells, 76 per cent of which were
polynuclear. During the course of observation, covering several months,
the red blood cells were once 2,100,000, but under careful treatment
rose to 4,110,000 not long before death. The next lowest red cell count
observed was 2,200,000, with 12,000 white blood cells, and 65 hemoglobin
index, in a man aged 52, with a terrible inoperative cancer of the cheek
and neck, of which he died.

The highest red cell count made was 5,400,000, in a case of cancer of
the uterus, in a patient aged 52, the count being 4,064,000 on entering
the hospital. The highest hemoglobin index was 90 in a number of severe
cases, and 100 in one case of sarcoma, to be detailed in the next
lecture. In one recurrent case of cancer of the left breast, which was
very distressing at first, the patient died peaceably and without pain,
with a hemoglobin index of 90, and 4,900,000 red cells, and 7,400 white
cells, of which 75 per cent were polynuclears, 17 per cent small
lymphocytes, and 7 per cent mononuclears. Her hemoglobin had been 70 per
cent on entering the hospital with 3,360,000 red cells. The highest
leukocyte count observed was 18,600 in a case of inoperable cancer of
the right breast, not long before death, in an unmarried female of 53;
but in the course of treatment it had fallen to 6,200, about normal,
from 10,520 before beginning treatment.

I will not weary you with more of these figures, which are interesting
and instructive as one studies them week by week in connection with the
physical condition of the patient. However much can be done for these
distressing and inoperable cases of cancer, one has to acknowledge that
when general carcinosis has set in we are still helpless in arresting
the lethal progress of the disease, although very much can be done in
prolonging life and alleviating suffering; and this does not mean with
morphia or codeia which in the end does harm, and was very seldom
administered to the patients referred to.

Forbes Ross, after ten years of constant microscopic clinical and
surgical research, has made some interesting observations, covering many
pages, on the blood of cancer patients, which have a close bearing on
our subject, and to which I can only briefly allude, and I do not know
if I can make it clear in the time I can give to the subject. By long
study of sections of carcinomatous tissue he claims that the mononuclear
leukocyte behaves in a very different manner from the polynuclear.
Briefly he charges the mononuclear white corpuscles with actually
producing the disease, by conjugating with certain epithelial cells,
thereby giving them the reproductive capacity which enables them to push
forward on their destructive career. The polynuclears seem to come up to
the defense of the body, but are overcome by the poison secreted by the
rapidly growing tumor cells.

The red blood cells he also finds, with other observers, nucleated more
frequently in cancer than in any other form of secondary anemia, and
subject to a change of composition, and deficient in lecithin and
nuclein. He shows the importance of potash, which we shall later find
clinically of such great value in cancer, and I cannot do better than
quote some of his words: “How vitally important potassium salts are to
the red corpuscles is shown by the following: One thousand parts of red
corpuscles are found to contain six hundred and eighty-eight parts of
water, three hundred and eight parts of organic solids, and eight parts
of mineral. Of these eight parts three and one half are of potassium
chlorid, two and one half are potassium phosphate, and decimal one
potassium sulphate; the remaining 1.9 parts are divided between the
iron, sodium, calcium, and magnesium, comprising the rest of the
corpuscles. More than three quarters of the total mineral ash of the red
corpuscles is, therefore, composed of potassium. This fact is an
important one, and the reader is earnestly requested to bear it in
mind.” Later we will again see some of the valuable clinical suggestions
which arise from his researches.

From our study of inoperable and recurrent cancer, and of metastasis and
the blood conditions in the disease, we see what a formidable task is
before one who would attempt to lessen its morbidity and mortality. We
see also how blind all have been who have so long looked to surgery to
stay its progress. In my former lectures I collected and quoted
statements from many surgeons of prominence in times past, and even some
in quite recent times, all expressive of a belief in a constitutional
origin of cancer, and many of them looking to a dietary cause. I also
gave biochemical laboratory and experimental evidence showing the
medical aspects of cancer. I then remarked that it seemed strange that
the medical profession and the public had been so slow in accepting and
acting on the accumulated evidence which I have tried to put before you
in these and the former lectures.

The reason for this seems to be that the medical profession, being
occupied largely with acute disease and apparently definite and speedy
results, became readily discouraged with the unsatisfactory course
commonly observed in cancer; as in the case of tuberculosis, until the
revival of an interest in the latter in recent years, with the well
known beneficial consequences. They, therefore, turned the cancer cases
over to the surgeons, in the hope that they could do better.

By the brilliant advances in modern surgery along many lines, the laity
also have become obsessed with the idea that it has limitless power in
many directions, and have yielded to the knife in spite of the rising
mortality of late years. The glamour of modern surgery and its often
spectacular results have quite blinded the eyes of many to real facts.

It is not a little interesting to note that the period to which we have
referred, 1910 to 1915, in which the mortality of tuberculosis has
fallen so steadily while that of cancer has so steadily risen, even in
greater proportion, is that in which active laboratory work has also
dazzled the public and professional mind. The enormous activity with the
microscope in regard to the minute structure of the diseased tissues,
and the elaborate and extensive work done in animal experimentation,
have turned the thoughts of many from the homely and practical studies
of the human frame in its various departures from health; thus too
little attention has been given to the deranged activities of its
various organs, and the perverted metabolism which, has resulted from
the stress and strain, with the temptations and errors accompanying the
present intensity of human civilization.

Matters being as they are it is hardly to be expected that the surgeons
would incline to any other treatment than by the knife, especially since
good pathologists have asserted that cancer is only a local affair and
have urged its early removal. Nor would one expect that the surgeon
would think along medical lines and investigate metabolic conditions,
when the immediate results of operation seemed often to be so
satisfactory. Neither would one expect the surgeon to seek from
statistics the unfavorable aspects of this line of treatment, but rather
those from which he could draw encouragement in trying to overcome so
dire a disease.

But slowly light is beginning to shine, and you have seen and heard
enough to realize that the simple removal of the _product_ of the
cancerous process, and surrounding tissues, can never check greatly the
morbidity and mortality of cancer. You know now what the real cancer
problem is. It surely is not the sole continuance of a line of treatment
under which the death rate has steadily risen from 63 to 81.1 persons in
each 100,000 living, or 28.7 per cent since 1900, with a mortality of
about 90 per cent of those once affected with the disease.

The cancer problem is by no means yet solved, but I think that you will
all agree with me that we are on the right track, and I cannot do better
than to close with a remark I made to you two years ago: “Scientific
research must still go on in the laboratory; but clinical research and
study, with laboratory work, on the human subject, which have not been
hitherto sufficiently cultivated, should be pushed, so that by a mass of
carefully recorded observations the truth or falsity of what has been
here quoted and said may be refuted or confirmed.”




                               LECTURE V
          DIETETIC AND MEDICAL TREATMENT OF CANCER PROPHYLAXIS


Although all statistics show a steady and alarming increase in the death
rate from cancer when regarded and treated as a surgical disease, it is
probable that this course will be persisted in until sufficient evidence
is accumulated to satisfy the medical profession and the laity that
relief can be obtained by other means. For, as the drowning person
catches at a straw, so the cancer patient hopes against hope that an
operation will be permanently successful in this particular case, though
the odds are so immeasurably against it. You have already seen some
patients who have illustrated the possibility of controlling cancer by
dietary and medical measures, and in the next lecture I shall hope to
show and report other cases and present statistics which will further
illustrate this possibility. We will now consider briefly what this
dietary and medical treatment of cancer consists in, and how it is to be
carried out, and also the bearing of all this on the prophylaxis of
cancer. In order to make this clear I must more or less repeat some
things that I have said in former lectures.

We have seen that, as shown by the kidney excretion and the condition of
the blood, the metabolism is deranged, both in the early and late stages
of cancer. We have seen that the nitrogenous and sulphur partition is
materially different from that of health, and reason indicates that in
some way protein, or rather its metabolism, is at fault. We have seen
that there is a deficiency in the urinary secretion, not only as to the
actual quantity, but also that the total urinary solids are commonly far
below the normal, often not half the amount required for the body weight
of the individual. We have seen that the intestinal excretion is
commonly imperfect and that constipation is the rule in these cases,
even long before the administration of anodynes. The secretion from the
skin is also generally defective, and the tissues dry and harsh, and the
saliva is generally acid.

All these, and perhaps other, elements point to a faulty performance of
the bodily functions, and to erroneous or deficient elaboration and
elimination of the waste products of the body; these latter are known to
be toxic to animals, and we know that in the human system they lead to
an auto-intoxication and derangement of the blood stream, which in turn
causes faulty cell and tissue action. Such a condition is recognized in
gout, as causing the local inflammatory manifestations, and in
rheumatism, which is so common in cancer subjects. All recognize that
obesity is due to some nutritive change, naturally acting through the
blood, and it is well known that cancer is peculiarly rebellious in
those subject to obesity. Diabetes likewise relates to a peculiar blood
condition, and there have been many observations concerning the relation
of diabetes to cancer. All these diseases and many more have their
foundation in faulty nutrition, depending largely on dietary errors.

We see, then, that to understand and rightly treat the systemic
condition belonging to cancer, which is indeed its basic factor, one
needs to take a very broad view of the complex processes in the human
system which pertain to metabolism and nutrition. This is indeed quite a
different proposition from the very simple surgical view which regards
the tumor as a local matter, of absolutely unknown origin, which only
needs the knife to end its career. Deranged, disturbed, perverted
nutrition is then the bottom fact of all erroneous growth, whether it be
obesity or a benign or malignant tumor.

Now it must be acknowledged that we are yet in the dark regarding the
exact or precise blood changes which precede and accompany cancer; but
in our last and also in previous lectures we saw that the blood did
exhibit changes which were evidently connected with the production and
continuance of the disease. Until all these matters which have been
referred to have been accurately determined by laboratory work and
investigation we are forced, as in time past, and as is still the case
also in regard to many diseases at the present time, to rest our
judgment and treatment on clinical experience, joined with deductive
observation, based on such knowledge as we have. And this we have
endeavored to do in these and former lectures.

Coming down, then, to the actual and practical facts relating to the
dietary and medical treatment of cancer, we readily see that the real
cancer problem relates to placing the patient in such a normal or ideal
state of life that the function of nutrition is performed in an exactly
proper manner, as nature intended, and from which man has erred through
the manifold temptations incident to our artificial existence, in the
presence of our so-called advanced civilization; for we have seen that
all over the world cancer has steadily increased with the intensity of
human progress.

Since first writing on the subject under discussion medical reviewers
have spoken as though I regarded the eating of meat as the sole cause of
cancer, and enforced absence therefrom as the single element in its cure
and prevention. From what I have just said you can see that this is by
no means true. But that I regard animal protein as a fertile cause of
the derangement of metabolism which leads up to and fosters the growth
of cancer, is most certainly true; this I have developed largely in my
lectures two years ago. While there are many elements which contribute
to the deranged blood stream of cancer, the question of diet is so
preeminently important that we must treat of it very fully. For, as in
gout the continuance of an indulgence in Port and Madeira wine in excess
would invalidate any attempt to cure the trouble permanently, so in
cancer an excess of animal, or even a large amount of vegetable protein,
militates against any effort to remove the disease medically; this is
probably true also of coffee and alcohol.

The first point, therefore, is to remove from the intake of food
everything which furnishes an excess, or even such a modicum, of
nitrogenous matter as is found by laboratory means to be badly
metabolized. The second step is to eliminate effete nitrogenous elements
from the system, including the cancerous mass, and the third step is to
restore the system to a proper tone by remedies and measures which
improve the blood and nutrition. It may happen, therefore, that in
treating a cancer patient over the long time necessary to effect a cure,
the greatest number and variety of remedies may be employed from time to
time, as intelligent observation and experience may indicate, to restore
and hold the metabolism and nutrition in a perfectly normal state: the
erroneous action of certain individual body cells which in the aggregate
we call cancer, will then cease to exist, as is seen in cured cases.

As, however, the diet is the basic element on which all health, good and
bad, rests it is all important that the physician and patient come to a
perfect understanding as to how this is to be carried out. And remember,
gentlemen, that there is no absolute or fixed time during which this
diet is to be continued; or rather, there is no fixed time when it may
be discontinued, and my patients are made to understand that it is at
their own risk that it is stopped. For safety from recurrence a proper
diet should be persisted in indefinitely or even permanently.

I recognize that it is often very difficult to persuade patients to
adopt and faithfully follow out this course of procedure for a long
enough time to secure perfect results, so obsessed is the medical
profession and the laity with the idea that surgery offers the only hope
of cancer. Numbers of patients, many of whom I have followed for some
years, now entirely freed from undoubted cancer, which had been
previously diagnosed as such by prominent surgeons, have told me that
they had suffered much more distress from the persistent solicitations
of their physician, surgeon, or friends, urging an operation, than they
had from the treatment or from the disease itself, as it slowly vanished
under the measures employed.

But as the true facts in regard to the ultimate results of operations
are becoming known, and as it is more generally realized and accepted
that the disease is amenable to rightly directed dietary and medical
treatment, patients are coming more and more to the Medical Clinic for
Cancer in this hospital, and adhering more and more faithfully to
treatment. Thus far, however, these have been mostly recurrent cases, in
which further operations were impossible, or primarily inoperative
cases. To illustrate the satisfactory treatment of early cases I shall
have to depend largely on those observed in private practice during the
last thirty years, of whom I shall try to show you some; for as yet
primary and operable cases are referred directly to the surgeons of the
hospital for operation.

At first the idea of an absolutely vegetarian diet is distasteful and
seemingly impossible to many patients, but when it is patiently
explained, as to the reason for its employment and the real benefit to
be derived from it, it is readily acquiesced in and commonly carried out
very faithfully; indeed many a patient has asserted that they are more
than pleased, and have no desire for animal food.

Among the poorer classes especially it has been hard to make matters
clear, and to facilitate the work of our Medical Clinic for Cancer I
prepared a dietary card, or folder, with a daily menu, which has now
been in very satisfactory use by hundreds of patients in private and
public practice. To make the whole matter of this line of treatment
perfectly clear, certain statements in regard to cancer have been
presented on the first page, and on the last page some directions as to
diet and mode of life of a practical character, as you will see on the
samples now passed around, known as the “green card diet slip.” I may
say that the hospital has already used up one thousand of these sheets
given to patients and to physicians making inquiries, and there have
just been printed this revised edition of five thousand copies, which
will be gladly furnished to those who can make good use of them for
cancer patients.


      New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, Second Ave. and 19th St.
                     DIRECTIONS FOR CANCER PATIENTS

1. Cancer is a serious disease which should receive constant medical
care from the time it is first suspected.

2. “Cancer Specialists,” who advertise, should be avoided.

3. Cancer is not contagious, and there is no danger of communicating the
disease to others.

4. Cancer is not a disgraceful disease, and there is no reason for being
ashamed of it or hiding it.

5. As soon as cancer is suspected, whether there be a lump, or sore, or
other symptoms, it should be at once cared for by a competent medical
man, as the earlier it is rightly treated the more prospect there is of
its being cured.

6. Anything suspected to be cancer should not be handled or squeezed,
but should be kept from all irritation, as all this increases and
spreads the trouble and renders the cure more difficult.

7. If it is decided that a surgical operation is desirable and wise,
this should be done very completely at the earliest possible moment;
delay is dangerous.

8. The proper medical treatment of cancer should never be neglected,
both at the very beginning, and also long after an operation has been
performed, to prevent recurrence.

9. It is not necessary to operate on every cancer; x-ray and radium are
often of value, and the disease can also disappear and remain absent
under careful and efficient dietetic and medical treatment alone.

10. This treatment consists in an absolutely vegetarian diet, with
continuous proper medication, for a long time.

11. To get favorable results this treatment should be kept up faithfully
and strictly until discontinued by the physician.

To assist in carrying out a strictly vegetarian diet, a diet list for
cancer is here given, which should be closely adhered to. Coffee,
chocolate and cocoa, as also alcoholic drinks, even beer, are harmful
and must be avoided. The rules given at the end of this card are also to
be strictly observed.


                            DIET FOR CANCER

                               FIRST DAY

                               Breakfast

                              Baked apple
                      4  ounces Rice
                      3    〃    Corn bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ½   〃    Sugar
                               Hot water

                                Dinner

                      5  ounces Tapioca soup
                      3    〃    Baked potatoes
                      3    〃    Stewed celery
                      3    〃    Peas
                      1    〃    Graham bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                      1  Fresh  apple

                                Supper

                      4  ounces Boiled oats
                      2    〃    White bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                      4    〃    Stewed prunes
                       ¼   〃    Sugar
                             Very weak tea

                              SECOND DAY

                               Breakfast

                                Orange
                      4  ounces Hominy
                      2    〃    Graham toast
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ½   〃    Sugar
                                Postum

                                Dinner

                      5  ounces Pea soup
                      3    〃    Macaroni
                      3    〃    String beans
                      3    〃    Carrots
                      2    〃    Bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                                 Dates

                                Supper

                      4  ounces Cream of Wheat
                      2    〃    White bread toast
                      1¼   〃    Baked apple
                      2    〃    Crackers
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ¼   〃    Sugar
                             Very weak tea


                               THIRD DAY

                               Breakfast

                                Banana
                      4  ounces Pettijohn
                      2    〃    White bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ½   〃    Sugar
                               Hot water

                                Dinner

                      5  ounces Corn soup
                      3    〃    Baked potatoes
                      3    〃    Squash
                      3    〃    Boiled onions
                      2    〃    Bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                                Raisins

                                Supper

                      4  ounces Farina
                      4    〃    Stewed figs
                      2    〃    Graham crackers
                      1½   〃    Butter
                       ¼   〃    Sugar
                             Very weak tea

                              FOURTH DAY

                               Breakfast

                               Raw apple
                      4  ounces Cornmeal mush
                      2    〃    Graham bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ¼   〃    Sugar
                                Postum

                                Dinner

                      5  ounces Vegetable soup
                      4    〃    Baked beans
                      3    〃    Cauliflower
                      3    〃    Asparagus
                      2    〃    Bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                                 Figs

                                Supper

                      4  ounces Rice
                      4    〃    Stewed prunes
                      2    〃    Graham crackers
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ¼   〃    Sugar
                             Very weak tea

                               FIFTH DAY

                               Breakfast

                                Orange
                      4  ounces Cracked wheat
                      3    〃    Corn muffins
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ½   〃    Sugar
                               Hot water

                                Dinner

                      5  ounces Sago soup
                      4    〃    Spaghetti
                      3    〃    Lima beans
                      3    〃    Boiled onions
                      2    〃    Bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                                 Dates

                                Supper

                      4  ounces Cream of wheat
                             Sliced orange
                      2  ounces Oatmeal crackers
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ¼   〃    Sugar
                             Very weak tea

                               SIXTH DAY

                               Breakfast

                      4  ounces Samp
                      2    〃    Graham toast
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ½   〃    Sugar
                                Postum

                                Dinner

                      5  ounces Celery soup
                      4    〃    Baked potatoes
                      3    〃    Carrots
                      3    〃    Spinach
                      2    〃    Bread
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                                Orange

                                Supper

                      4  ounces Wheatena
                      4    〃    Stewed figs
                      2    〃    Saltine biscuit
                      1¼   〃    Butter
                       ¼   〃    Sugar
                             Very weak tea

                      Repeat this bill of fare on
                           successive days.

Some interchange of the different articles may be made according to the
season and to suit the appetite or convenience of patients; but in the
main this bill of fare should be followed, with occasional substitution
of similar articles, if necessary.

Bread at least 24 hours old may be taken as desired.

A little old cheese may be grated on the macaroni and spaghetti, but not
cooked with it.

One boiled or poached egg may be taken for breakfast every other day,
and very fat bacon on the alternate days, unless otherwise directed by
the physician.

It is desirable to eat the skin of potatoes, baked or boiled.

Each and every meal should be eaten very slowly, for at least half an
hour, with long chewing.

One tumbler of water, not iced, is to be taken with each meal, but not
when food is in the mouth; also a tumbler full of hot water, one hour
before breakfast and supper.

No milk is to be taken unless specially ordered.

The vegetable soups are to be made from a stock composed of the water in
which all vegetables, including potatoes, have been boiled, added to,
day by day, kept hot, and allowed to evaporate; a portion is each day
thickened as desired with barley, rice, farina, sago, vermicelli, etc.

The cereals are to be boiled with water, three or four hours, and may be
cooked in the afternoon and re-heated in the morning, adding more water.
Rice, farina, and cream of wheat require only an hour. Chopped dates,
figs, raisins, or currants may be added to cereals when desired.

All the cereals are to be served very hot, on hot plates, and eaten with
butter and salt to taste (not milk and sugar). They are to be eaten very
slowly, with a fork, and very well chewed.

The crackers with supper may be varied to suit the taste; they should be
eaten dry, with butter, and chewed very thoroughly.

Nothing should be taken between meals, unless especially directed, and
the life should be as simple and healthful as possible, with early and
long bed hours.

                  *       *       *       *       *

This diet list has been carefully gone over by the dietitian of the
hospital, and as presented represents an average of 2,100 calories per
day, with 140 of vegetable protein. This is calculated for a person of
about 150 pounds, either in bed or not taking active exercise. The
quantity of each article may, of course, be increased if necessary, or
diminished for lighter weights, but in the main this has sufficed, so
that fat persons have come nearer normal weight, while thin persons have
gained in flesh. You will remember the girl of 20 years whom I showed
you last week, with the right upper jaw gone after an operation for
sarcoma, who weighed 89½ pounds on entering the hospital, and weighed
130½ pounds when she sat before you, three to four months later, with
the opening in the cheek perfectly cicatrized on the edges, and all
trace of the disease gone, on this diet.

You will notice certain directions on the last page of the folded sheet
which are of importance to remember: kindly look them over carefully. I
wish to call your particular attention to that in regard to perfectly
chewing, masticating, or Fletcherizing the food, even cereals, for at
least half an hour. Note also that the latter are to be eaten with
butter and salt, and not with milk and sugar, and with a fork, and not
with a spoon, in order to encourage slow eating. You will remember that
in my previous lectures I called your attention to the fact that the
salivary secretion was found to be at fault even in early cases of
cancer, and this perfect mastication is intended to stimulate these
glands and facilitate the change of starchy foods into glucose; for our
rapid eating in modern days may be one of the contributing basic causes
of the perverted nutrition manifested in cancer.

I would also call attention to the preparation of the vegetable soup,
which is to be employed in place of the stock ordinarily used, which
naturally contains the most poisonous extract of meat, or with milk,
which is not desirable. This vegetable stock contains all the salts and
other valuable extracts of the vegetables, which are commonly thrown
away, to the great detriment to proper nutrition; there is a great loss
of nutritive elements also occurring in connection with very many of the
so-called refinements of food which are the result of modern
civilization. Thus, the United States Agricultural Experiment Bureau
tells us that thirty per cent of the nutritive value of potatoes is
ordinarily wasted in the common method of peeling and cooking them. This
loss of vitamines is also true in regard to wheat and other articles.
You will notice that a portion of this vegetable stock for soup, made
from all the water in which all the vegetables are cooked for the whole
family, daily, is each day to be thickened and flavored as desired, to
which also chopped vegetables may be added and also various cereals,
vermicelli, tapioca, sago, etc. I may remark that many patients in
private practise have told me that their families pronounced this to be
the best soup they have ever tasted. Pardon all these homely remarks,
but as attention to details is of the utmost importance in dermatology,
so it is particularly true in regard to the management of cancer.

It will be noticed in the menu that I encourage the use of butter,
giving a quarter of a pound a day, in three portions. This contains 800
calories, or one third of the total amount required; a certain amount of
sugar is also prescribed, as affording an additional carbohydrate which
is completely oxidized under favorable conditions.

It is realized, of course, that this bill of fare may be improved on.
But it has been compiled with considerable care and thought, and an
experience with it for over two years, in dozens, or rather hundreds, of
cases shows that it is workable and accomplishes results which are often
surprising and most gratifying, not only in my own practise but also in
the hands of other physicians. I have sometimes remarked to you, perhaps
thoughtlessly, that if a person had lived for three or four years
according to this card, and continued to do so, I could guarantee that
he would never have cancer.

So much for prophylaxis. For, as stated before, I feel confident, after
many years’ observation and experience, that if the principles and
practise which I have tried to present to you in my former lectures and
these were closely followed by the community at large, there would
before long be a very gratifying diminution in the cases of cancer, and
in the mortality therefrom.

You may remember that in a former lecture I mentioned that in an
extensive trip I was not able to see or hear of any cancer in the rice
eating countries of the East, in Japan, China, India, Siam, and Egypt;
although I understand that there is some malignant disease among the
natives who adopt foreign habits, or who eat more or less meat, pork,
etc. With this experience in view I have sometimes placed certain cancer
patients, for a longer or shorter time, on what you are familiar with as
my “rice diet,” and with manifestly beneficial results. I would not, of
course, push it or continue it too long, but as a means of making an
impression on a full blooded person, with beginning cancer, and as a
means of facilitating the exclusion and elimination of nitrogenous
elements from the system, it has sometimes served a valuable purpose. I
also continually rather urge the consumption of rice by cancer patients,
as largely as possible, even daily, in place of other cereals.

In regard to the medicinal treatment of cancer it is difficult to be
clear and definite, and yet concise within the limits allowed for a
lecture. For, as you may imagine from what has been said in these and
the previous course of lectures two years ago, there is no one remedy or
even any single course of treatment which is to be invariably followed
or is always successful in every case of cancer.

In a disease of such uncertainty as to its definite causation, and of
such obstinacy and duration from its first inception, the remedies which
may be required in different cases are as varied as are the
peculiarities of the individual. The treatment requires the utmost
diligence and solicitous care and attention to details on the part of
both the physician and patient, and over a period of time which it may
be difficult to secure. This is rather a different proposition from that
of a relatively brief surgical operation, after which the patient is
dismissed with the hope that the disease will not recur!

Patience and perseverance, with medical acumen, are the first
requisites-but before this there must be a belief and confidence in the
truth of the statements, the correctness of the theory, and the value of
the method to be employed; with this there must also be an optimism on
the part of the physician which begets a confidence in the patient,
which will do much toward reaching the desired result. Unless much time,
thought, study, and effort can be given to each case of cancer, I should
deprecate any attempt to treat it medically, and rather risk at once the
chances of surgery, poor as they are. It was for fear of harm following
an incomplete understanding of, and an imperfect or careless carrying
out of the line of practise which I had pursued satisfactorily for
thirty years and more that I hesitated and delayed so long before urging
it generally. But the steady rise in mortality under the ordinarily
accepted treatment has impelled me to strive to make clear what I
conceive to be the correct view of its nature and cause, and the
approximately correct treatment of cancer.

From what has preceded in these and former lectures it will be seen at
once that rational and right internal treatment must proceed and
continue along the lines previously indicated relating to the
biochemistry of cancer. Some tissue cells have taken on wrong and
rampant action, of a reproductive character, owing to an erroneous
metabolism, which has induced a deranged or disordered blood current,
and some measures are to be devised and carried out to restore the
bodily functions to a normal state.

The first line of medical treatment, therefore, after preventing the
introduction of animal protein, coffee, and alcohol by dietary measures,
is to seek to restore to normal the various bodily secretions and
excretions. The urine, by repeated, complete, volumetrical analysis,
serves as a constant guide along many lines, which I considered pretty
fully in the former lectures and need not repeat now. In one private
case of cancer of the breast the total amount of urine passed each day
was measured and recorded daily, almost without an exception, for a
whole year, and specimens of the same were carefully analyzed and
studied almost every week. The total quantity of solids, which was at
first only one half what the body weight called for, was brought up to
about normal as the condition of the patient improved.

It is impossible in a single lecture to tell you of all the indications
and teachings which may be learned from the urine, much of which must be
acquired by close observation and experience. The urea is almost always
diminished, and this indicates an imperfect anabolism of the body cells,
as the urea represents the final metabolism of their nitrogen. Uratic
deposits are not uncommon, but other evidences of faulty nitrogenous
metabolism also occur, free uric acid, ammonia, aromatic oxyacids, etc.,
whose individual significance in relation to cancer it is hard to trace,
but clinically these derangements seem to have to do with the virulence
of the disease. Indican in excess, and often greatly increased
sulphates, are common, evidencing disturbed intestinal action. All these
and other abnormalities, having to do with a deranged blood current, are
to be rectified by proper treatment, the minor details of which cannot
be elaborated in a single lecture.

I have told you that imperfect intestinal excretion and constipation are
almost invariably found in the subjects of cancer, even in very early
stages and long before they have been induced by opiates given for pain.
I may here remark casually that even in severe inoperable cases up to a
fatal ending, I seldom have to give morphin when the patients are under
a full and complete line of dietary and other proper treatment; these
latter seem to so change the character of the blood stream, or act in
some way so that there is not the pain previously suffered. Possibly it
is in part through lowering the blood pressure.

The subject of intestinal stasis or constipation is, with urinary
derangement, such a very large one that it cannot be fully compassed in
a single lecture. So I shall take the liberty of speaking dogmatically
and shall tell you more or less definitely what observation and
experience has taught me to do along these lines of faulty urinary and
intestinal action in cancer. And really you will find it similar in many
respects to the lines of theory and practise which I try to develop for
you in connection with certain diseases of the skin. For, after all, in
many conditions of disease we are to treat the patient in regard to a
disordered system, and not always so much the particular disease by
name. You will also remember that I have told you how it was by
observing certain breast tumors which had been diagnosed as cancer by
competent surgeons, urging immediate removal, disappear without
operation under such treatment as I was giving for other complaints,
that led me to my present point of view and practise.

In regard, then, to the actual medical treatment employed I may say that
in the Skin and Cancer Hospital, and also in private practise, these
patients are almost always first given a certain mixture with which you
are familiar, ℞ Potassæ acetatis ℥, Tinct. Nuc. Vom. ℥ss, Extract.
Cascar. fl. ℨi-ℨv, Extract. Rumicis radicis fl. ad ℥iv, the amount of
cascara being varied according to the action of the bowels, which should
move freely twice daily. This commonly acts also somewhat on the urine.
This mixture is always taken three times daily, half an hour before
eating, in one third of a tumbler of water.

It is interesting to note that Forbes Ross, a London cancer surgeon,
whose untimely death has deprived us of a valuable scientific worker
along our present lines, was an ardent advocate of potassium in the
treatment of cancer, whose value he established on biochemical as well
as clinical grounds. He, however, pushed the administration of the salts
of potassium far in excess of that which I have found necessary. He has
related instances of advanced cancer in which the results were
remarkable, and one of them, a case of cancer of the uterus in a widow
aged 59, was quite a counterpart of one which I shall narrate to you
next week. I wish I could give you _in extenso_ some of the remarkable
arguments from microscopic and chemico-physiological study which he
gives, to explain how potassium has such a controlling effect on cancer
cells; but it is quite out of the question in a lecture such as this to
enter fully into every enticing field of inquiry, and I must refer you
to his valuable work. I am quite aware that when published this book was
the subject of some criticism and even ridicule, but reviewers could not
have properly grasped the whole book, which was simply so far ahead of
the times that it was not understood. Cancer was then, even more than
now, in the grip of the surgeon, who resented any thought of treatment
other than by the knife.

Dr. Ross had operated much in cancer, but, realizing the inefficiency of
surgery to cure the disease, he wrote very severely in regard to cancer
surgery in the opening chapter of his book. After “ten years of constant
microscopic, clinical and surgical research,” he advanced the hypothesis
that “cancer is due to a want of balance in particular mineral salts of
the body, and that the disturbance of this balance leads to the
disorderly and malignant growth of epithelial cells (epiblastic and
hypoblastic) which is professionally known as Cancer or Carcinoma,” and
that the main disturbance is in regard to the potash balance in the
body. By very careful deductive and inductive reasoning, and by actual
experimentation and practise he shows how this answers and explains more
of the puzzles and intricacies of the cancer problem than any other
hypothesis. In the previous chapter I referred somewhat to his
interesting studies on cell polarity, the red blood cells, and the
probable rôle of mononuclear leukocytes in inducing cancer-genetic
changes in the tissues.

Pardon this rather long reference to Dr. Ross, who was much
misunderstood by his fellow practitioners because of his blunt
expressions and his presentation of a new thesis regarding cancer, which
was not grasped, and, as far as I know, has been neglected by the
profession; his book was published in 1912, and has only rather recently
come under my notice. He died the following year, but at the end of the
book, three months after it was written, he added a note stating that
“all the cases described therein have continued to improve under
treatment, until some of them have practically ceased to be cases of
recognizable cancer.”

It is, therefore, not a little satisfactory to find from a cancer
surgeon such microscopic, biochemical, and clinical explanation and
support for the treatment which I have followed for thirty years and
more, and which I am now presenting for your consideration. Dr. Ross
makes three references which in a measure support the potassium theory
of cancer.

1. “The old physiological adage ‘Potassium is the salt of the tissues,
and sodium the salt of the fluids of the body’ still holds good as an
absolute physiological truth.”

2. “Animal physiology teaches us that the whole range of the animal
creation, from an ameba to man, follows the same law, ‘Potassium is the
salt of the tissue cell.’”

3. “Examination of the botanical world brings us face to face with the
same identical statement ‘Potassium is the salt of the chemical
physiology of the vegetable cell.’”

The first treatment, therefore, which is given to these patients is
potassium acetate, as previously mentioned, in combination with nux
vomica, and some cascara, and rumex fluid extract; this latter is one of
the old alternative remedies which I have used for years with most
favorable results in certain skin diseases. In some of the cases related
two years ago and in some of those I shall report in the next lecture,
this mixture, with little variation, has been employed almost from the
first to the last, with occasional alternation with other remedies. Dr.
Ross has used principally the citrate of potassium and phosphate of
potassium combined, which he gave in doses up to 90 grains per day, and
even more. I have quite recently used the same, though in smaller doses,
but it is too soon to report any results, and do not know if they will
serve better than the acetate, which I have so long employed. Dr. Ross
makes the interesting statement that, having used enormous quantities of
potash salts in his practise for fifteen years, for various complaints,
not one single case of cancer had ever to his knowledge occurred amongst
the clientele of his own practise, though he had constantly been engaged
in operating on cancer sent to him by other medical men. I made much the
same remark in one of my former lectures (p. 152), though I did not
ascribe it wholly to the acetate of potassa which I have long used so
freely, but to the additional normal salts which I got from a strictly
vegetarian diet.

I would not have you to understand that this is all that is to be done
medically for cancer patients; on the contrary, as the case goes on over
a period of time, a thousand changes may be necessary to meet symptoms
as they present themselves. And here arises the difficulty of making
exactly plain wherein lies the successful internal treatment of cancer;
for unless just the proper care is given at the right time all may not
go well. For this reason these patients should be seen at least once a
week, and for months, and the exact state of the system learned by
volumetric analyses of the urine and occasional studies of the blood, in
addition to the ordinary watching of the pulse, tongue, sleep, mode of
life, exercise, fresh air, absence of worry and nerve strain, diet, etc.

Iron is a very important element in the treatment of these patients,
though sometimes it will be found difficult to have it rightly taken and
properly assimilated. I have come to use largely the pyrophosphate of
iron in powder, in five grain capsules after meals, in conjunction with
the mixture referred to, half an hour before meals. Sometimes dialyzed
iron, half to one teaspoonful in water, taken in the middle of the meal,
acts best, though I prefer the pyrophosphate, as phosphorus in some form
should always be given for some time to these patients; it is to be
remembered that the iron, potassium and other elements of the blood
cells are united as phosphates. Occasionally I have to give the acetate
of potassium with nux vomica and infusion of quassia after meals, in
place of the other mixture, which after a while may be distasteful. But
remember that potassium is the sheet anchor, and also that in some way
the solids in the urine must be kept up to the standard of health, as I
mentioned in a former lecture, which I occasionally accomplish by adding
sweet spirits of nitre, etc.

I have emphasized imperfect intestinal action as a most important
element in the probable causation of cancer, and the regulation of this
function will often require the very greatest care, patience, and often
even ingenuity on the part of the physician. The stools should really be
frequently inspected. It is not enough to inquire at each visit if the
“bowels are regular,” but the matter must be patiently investigated, as
to the character, quantity, color, odor, hour of defecation, which
should be after breakfast, etc. Nor is it enough just to order
purgatives or laxatives from time to time, but such attention should be
given, and such remedies and measures applied, as will secure the best
possible performance of this most important function. The mixture just
spoken of, altered as required in regard to its cascara content, will
often suffice, but many of my patients also secure a full and free
intestinal relief each week, by means of the old pills which you hear me
order so often in this clinic: ℞ Massæ hydrargyri, Extr. Colocynth.
Comp. āā gr. x, Pulv. Ipecac. gr. ii. M. Div. in capsules No. IV. Take 2
at bedtime and 2 the second night after. I also use greatly the
excellent combination of ℞ Podophyllin, Cascarin, Aloin, āā gr. ¼, M.
one or more of these at bedtime, as needed. I do not approve of mineral
waters or saline laxatives in these cases, nor of mineral oil, and never
employ enemata, except for emergencies.

I hope I have not wearied you too much with these homely details, but I
assure you, gentlemen, that they are not in vain, and I only wish I
could go over these and other matters yet more minutely. My experience
with cancer for years has taught me well its seriousness, which I have
no desire to minimize. Its dietary and medicinal treatment is no small
matter to undertake, and should never be lightly entered upon. When the
diagnosis of cancer has been definitely made by one or more medical men
or surgeons competent to do so, the patient unfortunately is fully
imbued with the very serious character of the malady, and most of them
know well of the very slim chances of a permanent cure offered by
surgery.

Few know, however, of the hope of a cure which can be extended to them
by dietary and medical means, if they are perfectly faithful for an
indefinite length of time, and if the case receives adequate and proper
medical attention. It is for those of you who have heard these and the
former lectures, and have seen the cases, to act with confidence and
assurance, and give the utmost diligence and attention to details in
order to obtain similar results; for I assure you, gentlemen, that
thereby you can secure a success in cancer which is many times that
following the practise of surgery, judging from the distressing and
steadily rising mortality records up to the present time.

Do not be discouraged with apparent want of success at first, especially
when you are treating inoperable or recurrent cases—for those are always
depressing. But with more recent cases, such as I have reported in the
former lectures and will mention in my next lecture, you may be pretty
sure that if every feature of treatment is perfectly carried out you
will attain a measure of success which is very gratifying.




                               LECTURE VI
                        RESULTS: PERSONAL CASES


Two years have elapsed since I said to you in the last lecture of the
former course, “The test of everything lies in the results obtained.
Theories, discussions and arguments are all unavailing unless results
show their truth.” I can now repeat the same phrases after two years’
further observation and experience. And I can also speak much more
strongly than I did at that time, not only after testing the matters
then presented further, in private and hospital practise, but also after
an amount of study of literature which I should hardly have thought
possible some years ago.

First I want to recall to you the report of the interesting and
remarkable case which was made at our last lecture by Dr. C., one of
your number, who promised that if possible the patient would be
presented at a later lecture. This was in the person of a lady, now
about fifty, seen nearly ten years ago, who presented a great mass of
disease in the lower abdomen. On consultation it was decided to attempt
an operation, which was performed by Dr. ——, a well known surgeon. On
opening the abdomen there was found an amount of malignant tissue,
involving many organs to such a degree that it was decided that no
removal was possible, and the wound was closed, after securing a section
for microscopic study. This was examined by Dr. H., a well known
pathologist, and found to be sarcoma.

About that time, nine or ten years ago, I had briefly spoken in one of
my lectures about the value of an absolutely vegetarian diet and medical
treatment in cancer, and Dr. C., thinking, as he told us, that it might
possibly be of advantage to her, in prolonging life or perhaps making it
more comfortable, placed her upon it. He has followed the case up to the
present time, and stated to us that there was now no evidence of the
disease, the abdomen being normal under every examination possible.
Surely one such case should be sufficient to direct serious attention to
a plan of treatment capable of securing such a result in a patient who
is now living in comfort, nine years and more after the surgical removal
of the tumor was found to be impossible, and who would otherwise have
been dead long ago.

In my former lectures I detailed eight cases of undoubted breast cancer,
verified by surgeons, some of them well known, in which the results
obtained by the methods I have been presenting were most gratifying, and
I need but refer you to the account of them given in my book in which
the lectures were published.

You will perhaps remember that the first two cases had been followed up
for sixteen years and had remained well, without operation; the next two
cases, curiously enough, had each been observed for over nine years, and
as they are still under my medical care for various complaints I can add
two years more, making over eleven years that they have remained well,
without operation.

In those lectures I stated that I had recorded on my books in private
practise a total of 744 patients with Epithelioma, Carcinoma, and
Sarcoma. I now find recorded in private and hospital practise a total of
196 cases of carcinoma, 36 of sarcoma, and 685 of epithelioma, a total
of 917 cases of malignant disease. There are also records of some dozens
of cases of adenoma, cysts and chronic mastitis, etc., of the breast,
besides fibroma, lipoma, angioma, papilloma, etc., generally benign in
character, in various locations, all of which are, of course, excluded
from our study.

EPITHELIOMA.—Although epithelioma of the skin is included with cancer in
the Mortality Tables of the United States and elsewhere, I do not
purpose to admit it in connection with the results of treatment of
cancer, for several reasons. First, Because cutaneous epithelioma
occasions but a very small proportion of the deaths from cancer,
something over three per cent. Second, Because its cause and treatment
are almost entirely local, and so it does not relate greatly to our
general inquiry as to the internal or constitutional cause and treatment
of real cancer. Third, Because dietary and medicinal treatment seem to
have relatively little, if any, effect on cutaneous epithelioma, except
in the later stages, where the disease has caused great ravages, and
lastly, Because if the proper treatment of cutaneous epithelioma is
begun early and carried out faithfully it need never, or exceedingly
seldom, acquire a severity such as is often depicted by overzealous
surgeons who advocate only the knife.

In regard to epithelioma on the skin and also on the tongue, lip, and
oral cavity, however, I want to give you one word of caution, and that
is in regard to the use of nitrate of silver. I have seen so many
epitheliomatous lesions in these regions which have been goaded on to a
severe degree of ulceration by the injudicious and meddlesome “touching
up” of the same with nitrate of silver, that I would make it an axiom to
never use this superficial caustic at any time in connection with
anything which may possibly be epithelioma. I would almost consider it
criminal to do so. On another occasion I may take up the subject of
epithelioma very fully, but already I have shown you many interesting
cases, demonstrating how it can be cured by intelligent and faithful
treatment without surgical operation. Some of you may recall the
enormous ulcerating epithelioma on the left ear of a man of about fifty,
who showed himself repeatedly after the disease had been entirely cured
by the thorium paste, which you have often seen me use. You may remember
that the upper portion of the pinna was gone, but presented a thin,
delicate cicatricial surface, freely movable; the last time he was here
was fully two years after it had been entirely well.

It is not worth while to attempt to analyze here the 685 cases of
epithelioma mentioned, many of which were small and very superficial,
and easily cured. There were, however, many cases which were originally
classed as epithelioma which sooner or later, either with or without a
previous surgical operation, took on such a malignant action, with a
destruction of tissue, as would at once class them with carcinoma. In
reality, as you know, carcinoma is but an aggravated or malignant new
growth of epithelial cells, from the skin or glandular organs,
infiltrating the surrounding tissue; while sarcoma is a somewhat similar
malignant proliferation of connective tissue cells.

The ordinary distinction between epithelioma proper and carcinoma is,
therefore, vague and not scientific, and for the present will probably
have to rest on the basis of a superficial, or deep cellular,
disturbance. But, for the reasons already given, I protest against
including all instances of epithelioma under cancer, as in the
propaganda for early operations, and I do not include the mass of them
in my studies as to the results of treatment. Inasmuch as the border
line between the superficial and deep epithelial misbehavior is often so
indistinct, it is difficult to designate as carcinoma all that might
possibly belong there, but certain of them should be mentioned. In
looking over the records of my patients in private and public practise I
find at least 80 with the diagnosis of epithelioma whose disease was so
malignant in its course that they should certainly be included in the
carcinomatous class; these, therefore, appear in the following table,
which gives also the sex and location of the cases, both of carcinoma
and sarcoma:

                      PRIVATE AND HOSPITAL CASES

                  _Carcinoma_      _Male_ _Female_ _Total_
             Breast                     1      147     148
             Uterus                              8       8
             Stomach                    7        5      12
             Liver                      2        2       4
             Lip                       19        3      22
             Mouth and tongue          17        3      20
             Pharynx and esophagus      2        1       3
             Jaw and neck              10               10
             Nose                       5        3       8
             Orbital region             3        1       4
             Penis                      5                5
             Other localities          12       17      29
                                      ———      ———     ———
                                       83      190     273

                   _Sarcoma_
             Head, face and neck       12        6      18
             Trunk                      5        6      11
             Extremities                3        4       7
                                      ———      ———     ———
                                       20       16      36
             Totals                   103      206     309

CARCINOMA OF THE BREAST.—Of the 147 cases of carcinoma of the breast in
females the right breast was affected 64 times, the left breast 77
times, and both breasts 6 times. Of these cases 74 had never been
admitted to surgical operation; 59 had been operated on once, 12 twice,
1 three times, and 1 four times, with recurrence, or rather with
continued development of the disease. In 28 cases a surgical operation
was advised and performed by various surgeons, either before internal
treatment or after a trial for a greater or lesser period; in eight of
these it seemed wise to have an operation after a more or less faithful
trial of medical treatment. I may here remark that it is very difficult
to hold all patients firmly to the dietary and medical requirements
necessary to remove the disease, and many dropped off after a short
trial, while quite a number, 77, were seen only a few times or in
consultation, and were thus lost sight of. There were 101 married or
widowed females with cancer of the breast and 41 single, and 5 unknown.
The average age was almost 50.

The total number who were under dietary and medical treatment for a
sufficient time to form any judgment from, amount to 41, while a
considerable number are still under treatment and improving. It may be
noted that the first case of carcinoma I find recorded was on September
29, 1879, the second on October 31 of that same year. Many of the early
cases were noted accidentally, in patients coming for various diseases
of the skin.

Time does not permit my dwelling on many interesting points concerning
some of the cases represented in the foregoing table, but I want to
relate and present some cases illustrating the beneficial effect of
carefully directed treatment in this class of affections.

Before doing so, however, I want you to inspect a private patient, Mrs.
R. F. C., aged 50, who has only to-day for the first time come on from a
distant city for treatment, and has kindly consented to come before you,
veiled. The case presents many features well worthy of consideration,
and I hope on some future occasion to be able to report favorably
concerning her; although, as you see, it is quite an inoperable case, or
at least one in which the disease would certainly recur if treated with
the knife. The entire left breast is greatly enlarged, like half a
melon, hard, firmly attached, and with the axillary glands greatly
involved. It is interesting to know that she was first conscious of a
lump in the breast on September 1st, only thirteen weeks ago, and all
this has developed since. She presents the usual picture commonly seen
in these cases, namely, constipation, urine scanty and deficient in
solids, and the saliva acid. She still appears to be in robust health,
as is so common early in the disease.

The first case showing the effect of dietetic and other non-surgical
treatment to which I would call your attention is the private patient
who so kindly exhibited herself, veiled, at our lecture week before
last. I showed it then purposely as a case undergoing treatment, now for
eight months, in which there was still evidence enough of the disease,
with the history presented, for those who examined it to confirm the
diagnosis of unquestionable cancer.

_Case I._—Miss T. M. M., aged 37, consulted me on March 23rd of this
year, for a mass in the left breast which a surgeon of great eminence
had diagnosed as cancer, and urged most strenuously an immediate
operation, and from its rapid development had said that she would die
within six months if not operated on. She had had a neurasthenic
breakdown the preceding autumn, and for some months had now been under a
very great nervous strain, with a father aged 71, who was slowly dying
of Bright’s disease. Two years ago she had suffered severely from
uricacidemia, for which she had dieted six months.

The mass in the left breast was noticed only a month or two previous to
her visit and had increased rapidly; when seen there was a hard,
lobulated mass about two inches in diameter, in the outer, upper
quadrant of the left breast, attached to the puckered skin over an area
of more than an inch; there were also a number of enlarged, hard
axillary glands. There was considerable pain at times, which had been
increased considerably by the rather rough handling of the surgeon.

She was placed on an absolutely vegetarian diet, following what I call
the green card menu, which I gave you in my last lecture, and a mixture
of acetate of potassium, nux vomica, fluid extract of cascara and fluid
extract of rumex root, which I also mentioned to you at that time.

For eight months she has been under my constant observation every week
or two, and the improvement in her general condition and in the breast
tumor is very marked; you heard her say that she felt a thousand per
cent better. Her color is excellent, she has held her weight, 153
pounds, which is a trifle above that called for by her height and age,
and all this in spite of daily office work and very great trouble and
anxiety in nursing her sick father for thirteen weeks, who died in
October.

The breast, as you see, has still a lump in it, but it is soft and
hardly half the original size, the area where the skin was attached has
decreased, so that there is now only this slight dimpling or puckering,
and the enlarged lymphatic glands in the axilla have disappeared.

It is impossible in a brief lecture to enter upon all the details of
treatment followed out during these eight months, for they have been
varied according to the principles laid down in these and the previous
lectures. The former habitual constipation has been overcome and the
urine, which exhibited a great shortage of solid constituents, with
occasional indican, etc., has attained more nearly a normal character,
and in various ways she has regained better metabolism. To accomplish
all this there have been many remedies used from time to time to meet
various indications, as are shown by my voluminous notes every week or
two. I may add that the affected breast and axilla have been kept
painted with ichthyol, 50 per cent solution in water, which for some
years I have found to aid in the absorption of malignant lesions. The
patient is not well, by any means, and it will be some months before the
mass in the breast has entirely disappeared; but instead of being dead
within the six months, as prophesied, she is as healthy, happy, and
hearty a woman as one could wish, after eight months, under very adverse
circumstances, without pain, not having lost a day from work, and with
the tumor steadily diminishing.

I am often asked if the cure is permanent after this line of treatment?
In answer I can only refer to the cases reported in my former lectures,
where two were observed well after sixteen years and two after eleven
years. I may add also that if there is recurrence, and if the principles
which I have long advocated are correct, the recurrence would be due to
the same causes which produced the original trouble, possibly a neglect
of full treatment, and one would expect that a perfect following out of
proper treatment would again check the trouble, which is more than can
be said of surgery. Personally I have never seen recurrences, though, of
course, this may have happened and the patient being discouraged may
have yielded to the solicitation of friends and to the knife.

_Case II._—Mrs. J. J. T., aged 38, was first seen August 11, 1914. She
had been confined with her first child 4 months previously, but had not
nursed the baby at all, and had no trouble with the breasts. Four weeks
before her visit she had noticed a tumor in the upper left segment of
the left breast, which had increased steadily, with considerable pain.
When seen there was a mass the size of an egg, hard, and well defined,
somewhat tender on manipulation, with some glandular enlargement in the
axilla. She was placed on an absolutely vegetarian diet, with no coffee,
and the same mixture as the preceding case, the bowels being
constipated, and the breast was kept painted with the 50 per cent
ichthyol, which was afterwards changed to iodid of lead in Hebra’s
Diachylon Ointment. Later she took thyroid extract, also iron, etc., and
maintained her weight and strength perfectly. The mass in the breast
disappeared rather slowly, and it was not until just a year later that I
find it recorded that the breast was perfectly normal, with no trace of
the tumor, nor axillary adenopathy. She was again confined of a healthy
child in June, 1916, and the surgeon who had made the original diagnosis
of cancer reported the breast perfectly normal. Seen recently she still
remains absolutely free from trouble.

_Case III._—Mrs. I. T. G., aged 43, first noticed a lump in the left
breast two weeks before her first visit, May 17, 1905; this had been
diagnosed as cancer by at least four medical men, one of them a
prominent surgeon in Hartford, who urged immediate operation. When seen
there was a hard, sharply defined mass an inch and a half in diameter in
the left breast, above the nipple; it gave pain and was painful on
pressure. Beginning with the same treatment as the other cases mentioned
the change in the tumor was most remarkable, and eight weeks later it
was recorded that there was no trace of the tumor, that both breasts
were alike. She was a large, flabby woman, weighing 207½ pounds, the
kind who do so badly after operation. She maintained her treatment
faithfully, with an absolute vegetarian diet, and when seen two years
later weighed still 199 pounds, with no return of the breast trouble.
She was seen last for quite another trouble five years and a half after
her first visit, and the breast was found perfectly normal.

There is no necessity of illustrating this part of our subject further,
but I wish to make a remark about this last case, especially in
reference to the desirability of early treatment. We hear much from the
advocates of the knife that it should be used early, and yet we all meet
cases where lumps are removed from the breast almost as soon as they are
discovered and yet there is recurrence. Early dietary and medical
treatment, in this instance two weeks after discovery of the lump, was
observed to be followed by perfect freedom for five and a half years,
and beyond question permanently, if she continues to live along proper
lines.

Having now seen how very much can be accomplished in primary cases, that
is, in those who have not been submitted to an operation, let us
consider what can be done for those truly pitiful cases where surgery
has been tried and failed, and where one or many successive recurrences
after repeated operations has left the patient even worse than before;
and, as some surgeons tell us, worse than the patient would have been if
the disease had been left to nature, without operation and with only
ordinary medical guidance.

In regard to the cases with recurrent cancer after operation of which
there were 72, it can be readily understood that one cannot speak with
enthusiasm. But in my former lectures I reported three such cases in
which the benefits were certainly very remarkable. I also reported from
private practise another totally inoperable cancer of the breast, of two
years’ previous duration, with great cachexia, in which the enormous,
hard, ulcerating breast was reduced to about half the extent, with a
diminution in the large axillary and supraclavicular glands to fully one
half their size. The patient suffered no pain from soon after beginning
treatment until she peacefully died six months later, of exhaustion and
pulmonary edema.

In many cases, both in private and hospital practise, the beneficial
effect of a dietary and medical treatment have been very striking, even
after recurrences following repeated surgical operations; but it would
be unreasonable to expect any startling effects in cases which had
become so saturated with the poisonous hormone generated by repeated new
developments of cancerous tissue that there were numerous metastases,
not only in internal organs and lymphatic glands, but also with
cutaneous nodules produced in various parts of the skin through
capillary infection.

And yet in most of these cases there has been a betterment of condition
in nutrition, color, weight, etc., which sometimes seems to encourage
one that the real disease would be conquered. But although life has
frequently been prolonged far beyond what might be expected, and
discomfort and distress have often been greatly lessened, we have not
yet reached the position of checking and curing far advanced cancer at
all comparable with what can be accomplished in its early stages. I
dislike to weary you with the narration of cases, but a few instances
may help you to understand what is meant.

_Case IV._—Mrs. D. S., aged 53, first seen July 6, 1916, is a rather
recent case of recurrent cancer of the left breast, in private practise,
but it is instructive. Over five years ago a small pimple, as she called
it, appeared on the left side, which was left alone for five years. Then
on January 21, 1914, the left breast was removed by a surgeon of
prominence, and all seemed well for six months, when there was some
return and a second operation was performed in January, 1915; there was
again a third removal in April, and a fourth in August, 1915, all by the
same excellent surgeon, and the wound has never healed since. There had
never been any attempt at dietary or medical treatment or any effort to
check the causes producing the malignant growth.

Since January, 1916, there have been many cutaneous nodules developing
around the open sore, which when first seen presented a characteristic
ulceration eight inches long, by two or three inches irregularly wide.
The axillary glands were enlarged and the left arm, which had been
greatly swollen since the first operation, was hard, tense, and painful,
and, of course, helpless. The forearm measured 13 inches and the upper
arm 14 inches, the right arm being 8½ and 9½ inches, respectively. Her
weight, which had been 168 three years ago, was reduced to 133; she was
always very constipated and her urine deficient and irritating, calling
her also at night; she had long suffered from rheumatism, and also
severe headaches up to the menopause, seven years ago.

Under a rigid “green card diet” and the mixture already referred to,
with a larger amount of cascara, she began to improve at once in her
feelings, the arm became softer, and somewhat flabby, and the nodules,
which had been painted with 50 per cent ichthyol, were less prominent.
Later thyroid extract being added after meals, brought her weight down a
little, but during the last months it had been maintained steadily at
about 120 pounds. The urine which at the first was sometimes only 26
ounces in the 24 hours, with great deficiency in solids, has been
brought up some days to 45 ounces, with the proportion of solids to the
body weight about right. The saliva, which was very acid, is much less
so, though still acid and scanty, and the mouth dry.

Not to dwell too long on the case I may say that I find a recent note to
the effect that she said that she feels very well and friends think that
“there cannot be much the matter with me.” But she still has a
considerable ulcerating surface, though with islands of healing; she
still has many metastatic nodules in the skin in various places, and the
arm, which is still swollen, though no longer tense, is smaller, and,
really, the flesh shakes when the arm is quickly moved.

This is certainly a desperate case, after four operations, but the
difference between her present condition and what she would have been
without treatment can hardly be imagined. For in these five months she
probably would have been in her grave, whereas, during all this time she
has been traveling back and forth from her home, some distance away in
New Jersey, to my office, a happy woman. What the end will be I cannot
foretell.

I want you now to see and examine a Bohemian woman who has been treated
in my medical clinic for cancer at the hospital since July 26, 1916,
something over four months.

_Case V._—Mrs. P. A., aged 46, noticed a lump in the left breast two
weeks before it was removed, in this Hospital, two years previous to her
first visit to me at the medical clinic for cancer in the hospital.
Three months later the right breast was also removed on account of a
lump found there. All seemed to go well until about a year ago, when
cutaneous nodules appeared on the chest, first around the site of the
former operations; these increased till seen, when, as she now tells
you, there were fully fifty of them, forming a veritable _cancer en
cuirasse_, absolutely inoperable, of course. She was habitually
constipated, depending on medicine.

Being placed on the “green card” diet and the same mixture, though with
considerable cascara in it, and all the affected area painted night and
morning with Thiol in olive oil, fifty per cent, she seemed to improve
at once, and it was recorded that, after removing a crust which had
formed with the thiol and talcum powder over it, all the nodules were
less red and much less elevated. A small raw surface had formed, which
was touched with thorium paste, diluted to 25 per cent. This surface was
found entirely healed two weeks later, but other larger raw surfaces
have formed from time to time, which, however, have all healed
completely and perfectly, as you can see, with the occasional use of the
diluted thorium paste.

As you see her now the entire surface over both sides of the chest is
perfectly healed, and passing my hand over all the surface there is
hardly a trace of the nodules which once were so abundant. All who know
anything about the ravages of cancer will realize the difference between
her present condition and what would have happened under ordinary
circumstances. She has had no pain since soon after beginning treatment.

I could multiply these histories indefinitely, with, of course, varying
degrees of benefit, but I will trouble you with only one more case, that
of one of the many patients in the wards of the hospital. In this case
there were at first very satisfactory results, but after a long and
brave fight on the part of the patient she at length succumbed to the
dire disease.

_Case VI._—Miss J. M., aged 53, was admitted to the New York Skin and
Cancer Hospital, July 16, 1914. One year before there was an enlargement
of the right breast, with a general hardness. Later it became discolored
and a blue ring appeared around the whole breast, and some purulent
discharge from the nipple. Three months before entering the hospital the
breast softened in one place and ruptured, discharging pus and blood.
There had been some pain from the beginning, and latterly it was more
constant and severe. On admission the tumor involved the whole breast,
which was hard and immovable, with an ulcerating surface over almost the
whole extent, with an offensive discharge, and axillary glandular
enlargement. There were also small cutaneous nodules near the sternum.

She was transferred as inoperable from the surgical to my service on
August 26, 1914; she weighed then 106½ pounds, and presented a great
fungous mass on the right side about six inches in either diameter, with
a profuse and very offensive discharge; she was very weak, with a septic
temperature running up to 101 and over, and complained greatly of pain
in the tumor. She had been having X-ray once a week, which was continued
for a while twice a week, for twenty-four exposures, but without
apparent effect. She was very constipated and passed a small amount of
urine.

She was placed at once on a vegetarian diet (green card) and the same
mixture as the other patients, for a while, and a little later was given
dialyzed iron during the meals; the wound was dressed with a one per
cent solution of permanganate of potassium, later with Russian oil, with
some use of peroxid of hydrogen to check the suppuration.

For a while she seemed to do remarkably well, the color and strength
improving, with less pain and very comfortable nights, without an
hypnotic. In a week her weight had increased to 110¾ pounds, but then it
fell off a while, but on October 28th it had risen to 111¼ pounds. As
there was still a great mass of fungating tissue, helping to keep up the
toxic condition, quite a portion of it was excised on September 29th,
just after which the hemoglobin rose from 75 to 80 per cent, which was
maintained for six weeks, the red blood corpuscles increased to
3,490,000 and the leukocytes diminished to 8,500 from 10,000 when she
first came under my care.

The general condition had improved so greatly that she was out of bed
all day, but the body weight dropped quite a little, to 104½ pounds,
only to rise again four weeks later to 111¼ pounds. By October 10th the
wound was secreting very little, she slept well with no opiate, and
complained little of pain, day or night, and by October 28th it seemed
as though the disease was being overcome, as there was some evidence of
cicatrization in certain portions of the wound. All this continued for a
month or more, when she had a number of severe hemorrhages from the
wound and the hemoglobin fell to 60 per cent and the red corpuscles to
2,100,000. From this, however, she rallied under an intravenous saline
injection and Murphy drip, and the hemoglobin rose to 75 per cent, and
on May 21st the red corpuscles were actually 4,110,000.

I must not weary you with too many of these details, nor can I indicate
to you the varied treatment which was employed from time to time. I can
only add that she had her ups and downs, but finally succumbed on July
3rd, 1915, about a year after entering the hospital.

The case was a very interesting one and exhibited certainly some of the
beneficial results of treatment, although in such a hopeless case, with
such a mass of ulcerating cancerous tissue as she presented, secreting
its poisonous hormone, any other end could hardly be expected. There is
no question, however, but that life was greatly prolonged and much
comfort secured, as to sleep, diminution of pain and offensive
discharge, etc. The case was watched with interest by members of the
attending staff, and careful laboratory studies of the blood and
volumetrical analyses of the urine were made weekly; the latter was
generally scanty, running even as low as nine ounces a day, though of a
fair specific gravity, and it was very difficult to raise the total
solid urinary output to anywhere near a normal standard. The saliva,
tested and recorded before and after each meal, was commonly acid, often
strongly so, though at periods it would be neutral and occasionally
became alkaline for a while under active treatment.

I have taken up so much of your time with cancer of the breast that
little is left for consideration of the disease in other localities, and
I will be as brief as possible:

CANCER OF THE UTERUS.—Two cases, in private practise, among the eight of
cancer in this location which are on my list, are so interesting and
remarkable that I must give them somewhat in full. I may say that the
other cases had little or no satisfactory treatment. One of these two
would gladly present herself for your inspection, that you might verify
her present condition of excellent health, but she lives in Bangor,
Maine, and now only comes on periodically; this is in order to be sure
that she continues in the straight and narrow road necessary to keep her
free from her previous distressing condition. The case is as follows:

_Case VII._—Mrs. F. L. A., aged 48, weighing 105 pounds, was first seen
on March 21st, 1916. She had had four children aged 22, 20, 17, and 12
years, and had had a miscarriage 9 years ago. There had never been any
trouble with confinements, and never laceration of the cervix. The
menopause had occurred suddenly two years previously, but she had had
some vaginal discharge since October, and had felt weak for some months.
She had, however, never suspected any serious trouble until there was a
slight hemorrhage, consisting of only a few drops of bright blood, on
February 24th. That afternoon she was examined by a surgeon at home, Dr.
McCann, of Bangor, Maine, who sent her to me. He discovered that she had
already an inoperable cancer of great extent, which diagnosis was
confirmed by others, who refused to operate. The report which came to me
from the department of Pathology and Bacteriology of Bowdoin College
was, “About one third of the cervix destroyed, vaginal wall involved.
Right broad ligament infiltrated.” Curettings were made then, which from
“numerous slides show squamous cell carcinoma. From histological
appearance I judge that the cancerous process is developing rapidly,”
signed F. N. Whittier. The slides which were brought to me were
submitted to Dr. H. H. Janeway, who confirmed them to be “rapidly
growing, malignant epithelioma.” Those who saw the patient on February
24th gave the opinion that she would hardly live six months.

She had been following an absolutely vegetarian (green card) diet for a
week or two, and had been taking some compound cascarin tablets, which I
had sent her (℞ Podophyllin, Aloin, Cascarin, āā gr. ¼), as she had
always been very constipated, and since this treatment had felt much
better in every way. I gave her douches morning and night, of carbolic
acid and biborate of soda, ℨss and ℨii ad Oi hot water.

I then sent her to Dr. H. H. Janeway, who confirmed the physical
condition and gave her one single treatment with emanations of 300
milligrams of radium, for 16 hours, on March 25th, dilating the os, but
not curetting. She was then given ℞ Potass. acetatis ℥i, Tinct. Nuc.
Vom. ℨiv, Extr. Cascara fld. ℨii, Ext. Rumicis rad. fl. ad ℥iv,
Teaspoonful in water half an hour before eating, which she has taken
more or less continuously ever since, alternated with other remedies as
indications arose. Later she took pyrophosphate of iron, five grains
after meals, in conjunction with the mixture. For some time she had
suffered from severe neuritis in the neck and arm, which yielded
completely to aspirin, five grains every two hours, taken also again on
several occasions when it recurred.

I will not burden you with the many details recorded on her case paper,
but can only say that to-day she is as well a woman in every way as one
could wish. Her color is good, and a recent examination of her blood
showed hemoglobin 80 per cent, red blood cells 4,500,000, leukocytes
5,800, of which polynuclears 64 per cent, lymphocytes 27 per cent,
transitionals 8 per cent, and eosinophiles 1 per cent. She has made the
trip back and forth from Bangor, Maine, half a dozen or more times,
without fatigue, recently walked several miles, eats and sleeps well, is
no longer constipated, and has a good urinary excretion, with rather an
excess of solid contents; on December 6th she weighed 110½ pounds; her
normal weight before her sickness had always been 93 pounds.

On June 2nd she was examined by Dr. Janeway, who reported: “I find no
ulceration whatever on the cervix or vagina, the uterus is movable and
of normal size. There are no evidences of any disease remaining which
can be detected by examination.” On July 7th he wrote: “I have examined
Mrs. F. L. A. again and find that there has been no return of the
evidences of her disease.” On October 20th he wrote: “Mrs. F. L. A.
appears to be absolutely free from disease.” Her surgeon, Dr. McC.,
confirmed all this by examination. It is now over 9 months since she was
given 6 months to live, with an inoperable uterine cancer, and to-day is
in better health than she has been for years.

This patient had one single application of radium, as mentioned, on
March 25th, which probably aided in modifying the local disease, but it
would be beyond human credulity to believe that this was a very large
factor in restoring her to her present condition of health. The cure is,
of course, a very recent one, but there is no reason why the same
measures would not be effective should there be any return, as they are
directed against the real cause of the disease. Nor is there any
likelihood that there will be any possible relapse, as she is a most
intelligent patient who adheres strictly to the treatment and diet, and
will undoubtedly do so until directed otherwise.

Strangely enough another very similar case was also sent to me from
Bangor, Maine, which I will mention very briefly:

_Case VIII._—Mrs. H. F. J., aged 52, weighing 102 pounds, was first seen
August 3, 1916. She had been under an absolutely vegetarian diet (green
card) since July 17th, and was feeling better than before. She had had
three children, 27, 25, and 16 years of age, the menses had been regular
up to April 15, then nothing up to July 1st, when there was a clotted
flow, checked by treatment, which had returned in two weeks, with pain,
after an auto ride. On July 14th she was examined by two physicians who
found cancer of the cervix, which was confirmed by Dr. Janeway on July
31st, who reported “cancer of the cervix and vaginal canal, with some
cauliflower excrescence; the uterus was not much enlarged or fixed.” She
received one application of radium on August 1st, 300 mil. Curies to the
canal, and 120 to the cervix, for 12 hours.

She was given the same mixture as Mrs. F. L. A. and the “green card
diet,” and the injection of carbolic acid and biborate of soda. Briefly,
to report further, on September 30th it was recorded that she had
improved every day; she had gained steadily, and again on September 30th
that she had improved every day. She had a good appetite and was getting
back her strength, and seemed “quite like herself again.”

On October 20th Dr. Janeway reported that Mrs. H. F. J. was “free from
disease, although the healing is not quite complete.” This is, of
course, a very recent case, but the progress has been so satisfactory
that in view of the former case and the results so often obtained when
all proper measures are carefully carried out, there is reasonable
expectation that this will also result in a cure.

I will not dwell longer on carcinoma, though if I had time I could
relate many other interesting and instructive cases, showing
satisfactory results of treatment. My experience has naturally been
principally with the disease as it affects the breast, and many of the
patients affected elsewhere I have seen in consultation, or only a few
times, though some have been faithful to prolonged treatment.

But if the thesis which I have tried to establish in these and my former
lectures is correct, then sooner or later we will be able to apply the
same principles, more fully developed and more perfectly adjusted, to
cancer in other locations. And as the public and profession are better
educated along these lines patients will apply earlier, and the
pre-cancerous constitutional relations will be recognized and treated
before the cancerous mass has gained such headway. There can be little
doubt but that the same principles of treatment and prophylaxis apply
equally to the cancerous process wherever the primary lesion has first
developed.

SARCOMA.—Of the 36 cases of sarcoma, of various types and in different
situations, which enter into our list of malignant neoplasms, very few
can be mentioned as illustrations of the value of dietary and medicinal
treatment; many of them were seen only in consultation, or once or
twice, and it is very difficult for those afflicted with such affections
to be persuaded of the value of prolonged internal treatment when
surgery apparently offers such brilliant immediate results.

But there is one patient with sarcoma of the upper jaw, whom you saw a
while ago in an ulcerative condition, with a great hole in the cheek and
a cavern within, whose improvement is so phenomenal that I now present
her to you again to-day, as she is about to leave the hospital, after a
little over four months’ stay.

_Case IX._—Miss R. L., aged 19, entered the New York Skin and Cancer
Hospital, in my service, July 24th, 1916, weighing 89½ pounds. She had
formerly weighed 120. About three years ago a small lump developed
beneath a pigmented mole which had long existed, an inch or so below the
right eye. This grew rapidly until it was about an inch in diameter, and
was movable and painless. About January 1st a tooth in the right upper
jaw became loose and three teeth were extracted; a radiograph was taken,
and she was advised hospital treatment. She then entered another
hospital and the gum was incised and radium applied for 18 hours on
March 1, 1916. After this operation the face became swollen and very
painful, and an extensive operation was performed in May, the right
upper maxilla being removed, together with the tumor. Four weeks before
entering the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital a pin hole opening was
noticed in the scar on the cheek, which increased in size up to the time
of admission. She remained in that hospital until she came to us. The
microscopic examination of the portions removed showed the disease to be
sarcoma.

On entering the hospital there was an opening in the right cheek
something over an inch in diameter with ulcerated edges, and a cavity
extending down to the tongue, the superior maxilla having been removed
surgically. From the upper margin of the opening there was a mass of
dead bone hanging, nearly three quarters of an inch long by half an inch
wide. The interior of the cavity presented a mass of ulceration, giving
forth a foul odor. She was thin, pale, and anemic with 85 per cent
hemoglobin and 3,620,000 red blood corpuscles.

She was placed on an absolutely vegetarian diet (green card) and began
with the same mixture as the cases of carcinoma mentioned. The cavity
and opening were kept packed with absorbent cotton, saturated with the
following solution: ℞ Acidi Carbolici ℨss, Listerine ℥i, Liquor sodæ
chlorinatæ ℥i, Glycerin ℥ss, Aquæ hydrogenii dioxidi ad ℥iv, M., changed
several times daily. Under this treatment there was almost from the
first a remarkable change in her condition. The discharge ceased shortly
and also the foul odor. Within a few weeks the cavity and edges of the
opening showed a healthy condition and evidences of cicatrization could
be seen. The tongue of dead bone, which was soaked several times daily
with muriatic acid, separated entirely within three months, leaving a
healthy granular surface. By the end of four months the entire edge of
the opening on the face had cicatrized perfectly, and the interior
appeared in a healthy condition, with no ulceration whatever, as you saw
when she was presented the second time, a few weeks ago.

From the first her general condition improved and she began to gain
weight, even several pounds a week, being weighed every week in the same
hospital wrapper, by several nurses, who took great interest in the
case. I could hardly believe that she weighed 128 pounds on a Monday, as
reported, and on the following Wednesday I weighed her myself and found
that she weighed 130, which was quite a little over that called for by
her height and age, and ten pounds more than she had ever weighed
before. She had been taking for some time pyrophosphate of iron, five
grains after eating, in addition to the mixture mentioned, which had
hardly been changed since she entered.

The blood, which was carefully studied weekly, steadily improved until,
on September 18th, the hemoglobin stood 95 per cent, with 4,600,000 red
blood corpuscles and 8,000 white, and on November 10th the hemoglobin
reached 100, and the red corpuscles 4,700,000. The urine, which
presented albumen and granular casts on admission, had lost these, and
on November 10th she passed 1,000 cc., with a specific gravity of 1.025,
and normal in every respect, except a faint trace of indican.

You will now, however, be specially interested when you see the change
which has been wrought in her face by Dr. Semken, one of our attending
surgeons, who performed a plastic operation on her, beginning Nov. 14,
with the preparation of a flap on the right arm. This flap was lined
with a Thiersch skin graft from the leg, so as to secure a proper mucous
lining in the mouth, and left _in situ_ until Nov. 24, when it was
attached to the face, after the scar tissue had been cut away. The arm
was held in place by a plaster of Paris dressing until yesterday, when
the attachment to the arm was finally severed, after several partial
separations. The skin graft took from the first, without any drawback,
and now you see the opening entirely and perfectly covered. You will
notice that the ectropion, which was so marked when you first saw her
with the ulcerating surface, has about disappeared, and Dr. Semken
believes that there will be still further improvement in this respect.

I must not keep you longer, though I should have liked to narrate other
cases of carcinoma in other locations which are of interest. I trust,
however, that you have heard and seen enough to be quite satisfied as to
the correctness of the principles I have tried to lay down, and also as
to the success following their proper and careful application. How far
they will serve for cancer in general, as it affects various organs and
parts of the body, remains to be seen, when many others have reported
their results. Whether also this line of thought will apply to sarcoma
in general remains to be seen, for sarcoma is really of much the same
nature of malignant cell growth, only affecting the connective tissue
elements instead of the epithelium.

In closing I must again remind you that it is no trifling matter to
undertake the treatment of cancer by dietary and medicinal means, even
though from what you have seen and heard you may think otherwise. Each
case requires the utmost careful study and adaptation of remedies as may
be indicated to bring the patient into a condition of perfect health.
Diet alone will not accomplish this, but without the proper diet, as
already indicated, all other efforts are unavailing to check the dire
disease. With the proper carrying out of every detail the success is
certainly much greater than with surgery, and with advancing knowledge
and practise along these lines we shall undoubtedly see a satisfactory
diminution in the deaths from cancer, whose death rate has so steadily
risen under the measures heretofore employed.




                                SUMMARY
                       THE REAL CANCER PROBLEM[2]


Cancer has long been a problem over which master minds have wrestled,
and to read much that is written it would seem that we were yet as far
from its solution as ever. Countless able men, at the expense of
millions of dollars, have labored faithfully in the laboratory, and it
may safely be said that more effort and time have been expended in
investigations on cancer, and more has been written concerning it, than
ever in connection with any other disease affecting humanity. And yet
its mortality is steadily increasing pitifully, in spite also of active,
skilful, and faithful surgical treatment.

Is it not possible, therefore, that there is something wrong in our
conception of cancer and its treatment? If any other disease presented
such a steady and alarming increase in its death rate would we not stop
and consider if our treatment were the best possible? If with the
introduction of antitoxin the mortality from diphtheria had steadily
risen until it was about 90 per cent of all cases, would we persist in
employing it? And yet the profession and the laity go blindly on, with
the idea that surgery offers the only hope of reaching cancer, when the
Mortality Statistics of the United States show that under this line of
treatment the death rate has _risen steadily_ from 63 per 100,000 of the
population in 1900 to 81.1 per 100,000 in 1915, or 28.7 per cent.

Surely the lesson taught by the steadily and greatly _decreased death
rate_ of tuberculosis should teach us something of the value of most
careful dietary, hygienic, and medical control of other diseases. For
the great white plague, which a while ago threatened even the
destruction of the race, shows now a mortality which has steadily
_fallen_ 27.8 per cent since 1900, and that even with the continued
presence of the tubercle bacilli. I realize that the comparison is not
quite correct in all respects, for it is well established that cancer is
not due to a microörganism; but it does show us that nutritive errors
are at the bottom of the ravages of tuberculosis, and efficient
biochemical studies in cancer have satisfied many that the same,
although different in character, are true of this disease.

In other words, erroneous nutrition, which is productive of disease of
the kidneys, heart, and blood vessels, with their steadily rising
mortality of ten to twenty per cent since 1900, as shown on the chart
before you,[3] is operating to steadily increase also the morbidity and
mortality of cancer, in spite of active and intelligent surgical
treatment. And yet the profession and laity seem to be blind to this
fact.

It is also not a little remarkable that during the year 1915, when there
was a special effort made to educate both the laity and the medical
profession in regard to the advisability or necessity of early
operations in cancer, the actual death rate rose by 1.7 persons per
100,000 living, whereas the average yearly rise for the preceding five
years had been only 1.2 persons per 100,000!

What, then, is the real problem of cancer? Surely it is not to increase
the surgical activity, which has resulted only in a steadily ascending
scale of mortality, which in reality is greater than that observed in
any other malady! For the increase in the death rate from cancer
throughout the United States from 1900 to the present time has been
coincident with the greatest activity both in laboratory research, and
in the advanced surgery of the disease. I repeat, is it not time for us
to stop and consider whether our laboratory work with the microscope on
morbid tissues, and our experimentation on rats and mice are truly
serving to solve the real problem of cancer? Or whether we had not
better turn our attention to human beings, and by careful clinical study
of our patients, discover where the fundamental error lies, which first
induces the formation of an aberrant cell mass, which we call cancer,
and then continually feeds it by the same deranged blood stream, so that
it becomes utterly uncontrollable and invades and destroys other
tissues; while at the same time the anemia, pernicious and progressive
in character, gradually saps the life of the patient to a lethal end?
For repeated and most careful laboratory studies have demonstrated great
and significant changes in the blood in cancer. I hope to satisfy you
that the mass which is excised is only the _product_ of a far deeper
systemic change, which has probably already produced other, more or less
similar masses or deposits elsewhere—in the bones and internal organs or
lymphatics. So that surgical removal of the one often stimulates the
development of others.

It is seen, then, that it is here denied that the local lesion which we
call cancer is the first and only cause of disease. It is also denied
that the surgical removal of the offending lump and adjoining glands and
tissues, however early it is performed, is a sure and only cure for
cancer.

In the recent cancer propaganda, urging the very early and complete
removal of everything which could possibly be called pre-cancerous, it
is interesting to observe that most of the pictures shown and arguments
presented relate to cutaneous epithelioma, which the United States
Mortality Statistics show to be the cause of only 2.7 per cent of all
deaths included under cancer! Moreover, those of us who see epithelioma
daily know that, if properly treated early by other means than the
knife, it is commonly a relatively innocent affection. It is
acknowledged, however, that by meddling and wrong treatment, as with
nitrate of silver, it can be goaded on so as to become a serious affair.
In our present consideration of cancer as a disease it is to be
understood, therefore, that cutaneous epithelioma is excluded, and that
reference is made to the serious malignant disease known as cancer,
affecting various other organs of the body. However, many cases of what
might be called epithelioma of the lip and oral cavity are of such
malignity that they are properly ranked as carcinoma.

Looking at cancer, therefore, as a general disease of which the local
lesion, which is ordinarily excised surgically, is simply the result or
product of a previous, perhaps long-standing, blood or nutritive
disorder, we can readily understand why the simple excision of the tumor
and surrounding tissues cannot be expected to eradicate the malady
permanently. We can also see why the disease recurs so readily in the
scar tissue after operation; for all recognize and admit that cancerous
degeneration is apt to develop on any scar tissue. It is also well known
that occasionally a tumor which after removal has been proved
microscopically to be only a simple adenoma, has eventually been
followed by true carcinoma in the cicatrix or elsewhere, under the
stimulation of surgical procedure.

Metastatic development, after or without operation, can also be readily
understood on the ground of the disease being a constitutional disorder.
For, as far as I have observed, there is seldom or never any continuous
attempt made after an operation to alter the dyscrasic condition
producing the tumor, but the patient is dismissed with the vain hope
that there will be no more trouble. It is quite natural, therefore, that
the transference of cancerous cells by the lymphatics or blood vessels,
will form foci which are readily made to grow further by the vitiated
blood stream.

Regarding, then, cancer as a systemic disease, of which the tumor is but
a local expression, often or perhaps always the result of local injury
or irritation, possibly of one or more “embryonic rests,” let us briefly
review the evidence in support of this view, and the measures found
successful in combating the basic cause of the disease.

First let me remind you of the _negative_ and _positive_ results of
laboratory and other study, which are pretty well conceded by those who
know most about the disease; and in presenting these I cannot do better
than to quote what I have collected in a former article.[4] There are
eight of these in each group.

1. Clinically and experimentally cancer is shown to be _not_ contagious
or infectious; although under just the right conditions certain
malignant new growths can be inoculated in some animals of the same
species, but not in other species, and human cancer cannot be
transplanted on animals.

2. Although microörganisms of many kinds often have been found and
claimed as the cause of cancer, there has been no concurrence of opinion
in regard to them, and it is now pretty conclusively agreed that cancer
is _not_ caused by a microörganism or parasite.

3. Cancer is _not_ wholly a result of traumatism; although local injury
may have much to do with its development in some particular locality,
even as in connection with the late lesions of syphilis.

4. Cancer is _not_ hereditary in any appreciable degree; although some
tendency in that direction has been demonstrated in certain strains of
mice.

5. Occupation has _not_ any very great influence on the occurrence of
cancer; although it is more frequent in some pursuits than in others.

6. Cancer is _not_ altogether a disease of older years; although its
occurrence is decidedly influenced by advancing age.

7. It does _not_ especially belong to or affect any particular sex,
race, or class of persons.

8. Cancer is _not_ confined to any location or section of the earth, but
has been observed in all countries and climates.

But while laboratory and other investigations have not demonstrated any
single cause of cancer and have yielded only negative results, they
have, by elimination, cleared the way for a study of its cause along
other lines, which are bright with promise. They have also established
certain facts which confirm the views which from time to time have been
briefly expressed by many who were best acquainted with cancer; namely,
that, because of its constant recurrence, and from the failure of
surgery to check its rising mortality, it must be of a constitutional
nature, intimately associated with dietary or nutritional elements, as I
have elsewhere shown.[5]

The _positive_ results of laboratory investigation are more encouraging:

1. We know now that the local mass, which we call cancer, represents but
a deviation from the normal life and action of the ordinary cells of the
body. These once normal cells, for some as yet unexplained reason, take
on an abnormal or morbid action, with a continued tendency to malignancy
which invades and destroys contiguous tissue, and is associated with a
progressive anemia which destroys life.

2. Microscopic study has shown that there is a certain change in the
polarity of cells about to be cancer-genetic, with an altered relation
of the centrosome to the nucleus. These changes have been well
attributed to an alteration in the enzyme contained in the cell, which
further depends on the nutrition of the cell as influenced by a faulty
metabolism of food elements.

3. The exclusion of all other possible causes leads us naturally to look
to a disordered metabolism as a cause of the disturbed action of the
hitherto normal cells; and we find much to confirm this view both in
laboratory studies on the biochemistry of cancer, and also in clinical
and statistical observations.

4. The blood in advancing cancer has repeatedly been shown to exhibit
many manifest changes, which indicate vital alteration in the action of
the organs which form blood, and so control the nutrition of the body
and its cells.

5. Laboratory and clinical evidence demonstrate that the secretions and
excretions of the body, both in early and late stages of cancer, exhibit
departures from normal which deserve consideration. Although not one of
these has as yet been established as pathognomonic of cancer, they all
indicate metabolic disturbances which influence the nutrition of the
cellular elements, and so these secretory and excretory disturbances are
of importance in connection with its causation.

6. As all healthy cells of the body, by their catabolism and anabolism
contribute a hormone or something to the general circulation, so
experimental evidence shows that the cells of a cancer mass itself, when
fully developed, secrete a hormone or something which is poisonous to
animals, and which probably hastens the lethal progress of the disease.

7. Repeated laboratory experiences have demonstrated, in a most
remarkable manner, the absolute controlling effect of diet on the
development of inoculated cancer in mice and rats, so that the process
was inhibited almost entirely with certain vegetable feedings.

8. We thus see that as the laboratory has eliminated the local nature of
cancer, it has also, in a measure, established the fact that there are
medical aspects of the disease which further studies will show to be of
the utmost importance. These all tend to demonstrate its constitutional
origin, that is, its relation to deranged metabolism, which is now
recognized as the basis of so many diseases of more or less serious
character.

But clinical and statistical studies come in with overwhelming force to
confirm the correctness of this position.

1. We have already seen that with utter medical neglect the death rate
of cancer has steadily and greatly increased in the United States, of
late years, in spite of the prodigious advances of surgery during the
same time. This is also true in all the countries from which we have any
accurate statistics. We know also that tuberculosis, as a result of
careful medical attention, has decreased in mortality by almost as great
a percentage as cancer has increased. The same is reported by reliable
observers all over the civilized world.

2. Any number of observers, in many lands, have recorded the almost
entire absence of cancer among aborigines, living simple lives, largely
vegetarian; they have also shown the definite increase in the disease,
and in its mortality, in proportion to their adoption of the customs and
diet of so-called modern civilization.

3. This increase of cancer mortality seems to depend largely upon the
altered conditions of life attending advanced civilization, particularly
along the lines of self-indulgence in eating and drinking and in
indolence.

4. Statistics from many countries show that increase in the consumption
of meat, coffee, and alcoholic beverages, appears to be coincident with
a very great and proportionately greater augmentation of the mortality
from cancer.

5. Clinical observation has time and again shown the effect of specific
nerve strain and shock in the development of cancer; and there seems to
be little question but that the enormous nerve strain of modern life is
an element of importance in this direction, both through metabolic
disturbance and by direct action on living cells.

6. At present no clear demonstration is possible of the direct method by
which errors of metabolism effect the changes in cells to which we give
the name malignant, any more than we know how other alterations on the
body are produced; such as arterial degeneration, bone changes, obesity,
etc., which are recognized as due to metabolic derangement.

7. The results which have been observed in connection with the
starvation of cancer, by ligature of vessels, illustrate the relation of
the blood supply to growing cancer.

8. Finally, the repeated observation and report of the spontaneous
disappearance of cancer, by careful and competent medical men, shows
that conditions of the system may arise which are antagonistic to
malignant growth, even when it has begun to take place; just as there
are other conditions of the system which favor the aberrant action of
previously normal cells, resulting in cancer.

The medical aspects of cancer thus loom large, and appear in quite a
different light from that in which they have been commonly viewed. We
now begin to see some of the reasons why cancer is not primarily a
surgical disease, and some of the lines along which observation and
investigation should proceed; namely, biochemistry, secretory and
excretory derangements, metabolic disturbances, diet, etc., etc. The
subject is too new a one to afford a great amount of corroborative proof
at present, other than the long personal experience of the writer and
others, who have seen tumors disappear under means other than surgical,
X-ray, and radium. More clinical and laboratory investigations of human
beings are needed, and not simply microscopic studies and experiments on
animals, valuable as these have been in the advancement of medical
science in connection with other diseases.

We will now consider briefly some of the practical points in regard to
the successful treatment of cancer by means other than the knife. I will
not take time to review or even to mention the various methods and means
which have been proposed and advocated for the cure of cancer, only to
end in disappointment for the reason that they did not reach the basic
cause of the complaint. The very multiplicity of the suggestions proves
their futility.

The line of thought and practise to which I would devote your special
attention is not entirely new, but has been hinted at by many careful
observers during the past hundred years or more, though it has never
before been fully developed or strongly urged. But the experiences of
over forty years, together with much study, has so convinced me of the
correctness of the principles and practise which I advocate that I
cannot too strongly urge you to consider them fully and without bias,
and to put them to a satisfactory test, although I quite realize that
they are contrary to the generally accepted views of the profession and
laity.

The fundamental principle of my thesis lies in the fact that with the
so-called advance of modern civilization, certain diseases, for the last
fifteen years at least, have showed a steadily increasing mortality. The
deaths in the United States from apoplexy, nephritis, and heart disease
have steadily increased over ten, fifteen, and twenty per cent
respectively, and those from cancer 28.7 per cent. We all realize that
the results in the three former diseased conditions are from errors in
the mode of life, including eating and drinking, and indolence, and
careful study shows that cancer has the same origin. On the other hand,
as already stated, the deaths from tuberculosis have steadily declined
27.8 per cent under rational medical treatment, directed mainly along
the lines of correct nutrition: the death rate of tuberculosis and
cancer have thus approached each other 56.5 per cent, and at this rate
in fifteen years more the mortality from cancer will exceed that from
tuberculosis!

Careful and prolonged studies of cancer patients, both in the earlier
and later stages of the disease, as I have recorded elsewhere,[6] show
that there are always departures from normal metabolism, as is shown by
the condition of the blood, and in the excretion from the bowels,
kidneys, and skin, and in the salivary and hepatic secretions, and
possibly in those of the ductless glands. Time does not permit here of
elaborating this subject, which has been done elsewhere, but it is
evident that some combination of internal systemic disorders must be
recognized as the basic cause of the complaint, although at the present
time it is difficult to point to a single causative element, if, indeed,
it will ever be discovered.

But a broad view of metabolism and nutrition recognizes that all cell
changes, whether good or bad, depend on the character and composition of
the blood furnished to the tissues, although little definite may be
known concerning it. Thus, no one has demonstrated the single causative
change in the blood in arteriosclerosis, gout, rickets, scorbutus, etc.,
but no one questions that it exists, and we direct our therapeutic
measures accordingly, largely from experience.

The same is true in cancer. Most careful and prolonged study of the
patient in every respect has shown a certain uniformity in regard to
particular deviations from health, the correction of which has been
followed by a complete disappearance of tumors classed as malignant, so
that the connection must seem obvious to an unprejudiced mind. And yet
it cannot be claimed that the exact, single cause of the cancerous
growth has been demonstrated, and from the nature and character of the
systemic disorders found, it is evident that there can never be any
single remedy which can be rightly claimed as a cure for cancer.

But that cancer can be cured by medical means and without the knife is
absolutely certain, as the experience of many testify, and as the writer
has observed in so many cases during the past 30 and more years. Many of
the instances in the hands of others have occurred unexpectedly, and
without definite or careful study and record of the measures employed.
But in some way the condition of the blood and system has become altered
so that there has occurred a retrogressive process which resulted in the
absorption of the tumor. I may say that this was the case in regard to
the earlier patients in my own practise, when I observed that tumors of
the breast, which had been diagnosed as cancer by surgeons, disappeared
under dietetic and other measures given for some skin affection; later
observation and study have crystallized my views and confirmed my
methods of procedure, which I hope to make plain, as briefly as
possible, lack of time to explain everything must make me a little
dogmatic.

An absolutely vegetarian diet is the first requisite in the treatment
and prophylaxis of cancer, for, as mentioned, this has been found
experimentally to inhibit, often to a remarkable degree, the production
of artificially produced cancer in rats and mice, and experience
throughout the world has shown cancer to be extremely rare in
vegetarians. This diet, which should be maintained indefinitely, must be
rigorous and absolutely vegetarian, excluding animal protein, even eggs
and milk; butter is the only article allowed which does not grow, and of
this one quarter of a pound is to be taken daily, by a person weighing
150 pounds. Cereals are to be freely employed, eaten slowly, with a
fork, and with butter, and not with milk and sugar, though the latter
may be used moderately, where it seems necessary and where it perfectly
agrees with the patient.

Perfect mastication, with thorough insalivation, is very essential, and
I insist on at least half an hour being taken for even the lightest
meal. Coffee, chocolate, and cocoa are excluded from the diet, only weak
tea being allowed, with some postum or other artificial substitute for
coffee.

Alcohol in each and every form is absolutely excluded, as it always has
a very harmful effect on cancer. Sufficient water, not iced, should be
taken to answer to the needs of the system, and I commonly give half a
pint with each meal, and half a pint, hot, one hour before both
breakfast and the evening meal.

Cancer being a disease of advancing civilization, with all its
temptations and errors in living, it is essential that the cancer
subject lead a very simple and healthy life, with regular hours of
eating and sleeping, with a reasonable amount of exercise, and the
avoidance of everything which could disturb normal metabolism.

There is, of course, no single medicine which can cure cancer, but
proper medication plays a very important part in overcoming the disease
and should never be neglected or interrupted in any case; indeed, one
suffering from or threatened with cancer should be under the most
careful medical guidance indefinitely, and this is especially true after
the surgical removal of the tumor, or local manifestation of the morbid
process, as Abernethy so strongly asserted, nearly a hundred years ago.

Medical treatment lies mainly along the lines of elimination, which is
always found to be faulty, both by the bowels and kidneys. My records of
large numbers of private patients show that there is imperfect
intestinal secretion, both in the very early stages and late in cancer,
even before morphin is taken. Therefore I have long come to look upon
intestinal auto-intoxication as a prime factor of causation, and lately
Sir Arbuthnot Lane has spoken of cancer as a terminal result of
intestinal stasis. This constipation, however, is not to be met with
occasional purgatives, but by measures which will secure a good normal
evacuation once or oftener daily. My principal reliance for this is
cascara, in combination with other remedies, although I also very often
give once a week, on alternate days, two good laxatives of blue mass,
colocynth, and ipecac. Mineral waters, Russian oil, etc., are not
desirable, and enemata are resorted to only in emergencies.

The kidney secretion in early and late cancer is always faulty. This
does not refer to albumen and casts, or sugar, which are searched for
but seldom found. But very careful and repeated volumetric analyses of
its many normal ingredients reveal errors in its composition which are
of significance and which serve as a guide in therapy. There is always a
faulty nitrogenous partition, and in that of sulphur; indican is
commonly in excess, often very greatly so, and the chlorids and
phosphates and sulphates deranged. The urinary secretion will constantly
be found to be extremely deficient, both as to the actual quantity
passed in the 24 hours, and in its total solid contents, which are often
hardly one half of that called for by the body weight of the patient;
this I have verified by hundreds of analyses. As these errors are
corrected by proper treatment there will be a coincident improvement in
the vitality of the patient and in the tumor.

The remedy which I have largely relied on in these cases for many years
is acetate of potassa, and it is interesting to note that Ross[7] of
London claims that a cause of cancer is found in a disturbance in the
mineral contents of the blood, and that there is a lack of potassa, and
he gives as high as 90 grains of phosphate and carbonate of potassa in
the day, with excellent results. I commonly give the acetate in
combination with other remedies, thus ℞ Potass. acetatis ℥i, Tinct. Nuc.
Vom. ℨiv, Ext. Cascara fld. ℨi-ℨiv, Extr. Rumicis radicis fld. ad ℥iv,
M. Teaspoonful in water ½ hour before eating.

But in the long treatment necessary for these cases before the malignant
growth has quite disappeared, and possibly for a good while afterward,
there may be many remedies used with advantage to secure and maintain
that healthy metabolism requisite to overcome the cancerous habit. Iron
and arsenic, phosphates and strychnin, and even cod liver oil and many
reconstructive remedies and measures may bear their share in overcoming
this dire disease. Thyroid extract sometimes assists materially in
removing the malgrowth, but must be given with caution, and in
connection with other proper remedies; for sometimes it will promote
catabolism and disintegrate the diseased tissue faster than the
emunctories can remove the effete products, and these may poison the
system.

It has been difficult in a single address to present such a vast
subject, which is more or less new to many, in a clear and concise form,
and I fear that I have trespassed too greatly on your patience, and have
yet only imperfectly made matters clear. But I shall be satisfied if I
have excited your interest sufficiently to cause you to investigate the
medical aspects of cancer, in which lies the real problem of its
prevention and cure. Surgery has been tried faithfully by many brilliant
and honest men, some of whom now and then acknowledge the failure of the
knife to arrest the steadily increasing mortality from the disease,
which is now about 90 per cent of all those once attacked.

But I fully realize that there is danger in my strenuous advocacy of
other lines of treatment, lest these should not be fully and perfectly
carried out, with such intelligence, patience, and persistence, on the
part of the physician and patient as is requisite to accomplish the end
desired. For I must say that it is extremely tedious and tiresome to
care minutely for these patients, who should be seen at least weekly,
and even for months or years, with careful and accurate records,
innumerable urinary and blood analyses, etc., etc.

On the other hand, however, we have the alternatives of leaving the
patient to suffer and die, or to submit to a surgical operation with the
expectation of recurrence in a considerable proportion of cases,
attended often with greater suffering and final death.

My experience with the disease for forty years or more in private
practise, and for the last few years in my medical clinic for cancer, in
the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, and in the wards of the hospital,
have so fully convinced me of the correctness of the views I have stated
here and elsewhere that I cannot too strongly beg you to give them due
consideration, and not simply to class them with the various passing
claims and suggestions regarding cancer, which have so often proved
illusory. For along the lines which I have presented lies the real
cancer problem, as I can demonstrate by many cases more or less similar
to those detailed in my little book.




                                 INDEX


 Acidity of saliva in cancer, 44, 146, 164, 199, 213, 221

 Activity, increased surgical, not the solution of cancer problem, 242

 Age as related to cancer, 50

 Agnew on surgery in cancer, 93

 Alcohol harmful in cancer, 157

 Alkalescence of the blood in cancer, 132

 Amino-acid nitrogen, increased in cancer, 42

 Anabolism, 62

 Anemia of cancer, 130

 Appetite and taste, 63

 Approach of death rate of cancer and tuberculosis, 87, 259

 Argentine Republic, cancer in, 69

 Australia, meat eating and cancer in, 70

 Austria, cancer mortality in, 85


 Bashford and Murray, 75

 Basic cause of cancer, 147

 Biopsy, danger of, in cancer, 123

 Blindness as to results of surgery in cancer, 139, 240, 243

 Blood in cancer, 131, 134, 137, 219, 235

 Bones, cancer of, 130

 Bovee on cancer of the uterus, 104

 Breast, cancer of the, 97, 197
   cancer mortality, 82
   frequency of cancer in, 49

 Butter, caloric value of, 166
   value of, in cancer, 166, 263

 Byrne, on cancer of the uterus, 102, 104


 California, cancer mortality in, 79

 Calories, daily amount of, in menu, 163

 Cancer, anemia, 130
   and civilization, 57, 72, 83
   and dietary and medical treatment, results in, 188, 200‒237
   and meat eating, 68‒71, 149

 Cancer, and nitrogenous matter, 37, 150
   and rice eating, 168
   and tuberculosis, approach of death rate of, 87, 241, 259
     comparative death rates of, 241
   basic cause of, 147, 261
   blindness as to results of surgery in, 139, 240
   blood in, 131
   cases, personal, 196
   conception of hitherto wrong, 240
   daily amount of calories in, 163
   diet for, 157
   dietetic and medical treatment of, 144
   disappearing under general medical treatment, 175, 200‒237
   en cuirasse, 131
   hemoglobin in, 134, 219
   houses, 59
   inoperable, benefited by medical treatment, 209, 217
   medical treatment of, patience necessary in, 170
   mortality, chart showing, 87
     increased, since educational propaganda, 78, 88, 242
   not a local disease, 67
   of bones, 130
   of the breast, 49, 97, 197
   of the gall bladder, 106
   of the lip, 95
   of the liver, 129
   of the lungs, 130
   of the mouth, 95
   of the rectum, 106
   of the skin, 130
   of the stomach, 105
   of the tongue, 95
   of the uterus, 102
     cured by medical treatment, 200‒237
     vegetarian diet in, 224, 228
   patients, directions for, 155
   primary, removed by medical treatment, 200, 208
   problem, not settled yet, 143
     not solved by greater surgical activity, 242
     the real, 149, 239
   recurrent, 119
     and medical treatment, 208
     benefited by medical treatment, 209, 211, 214
   red blood cells in, 134, 137, 219
   relation of climate to, 58
   research, negative results of, 248
     positive results of, 250
   saliva acid in, 44, 146, 199, 213, 221
   specialists, 155
   the real problem of, 239
   tissue, a product of systemic changes, 142, 244
   urinary excretion imperfect in, 173, 146, 218
   urinary solids deficient in, 39, 172
   urine deficient in, 146, 173, 218, 221
   weight of patients in, 219, 226, 235
   white blood corpuscles in, 219
   wrong conception of, 240

 Carcinoma cases, personal, 196

 Carcinoma or epithelioma, 194, 195

 Carcinosis, 130, 136

 Catabolism, 62

 Cause, basic, of cancer, 147, 261

 Cereals, how cooked and eaten, 162, 164

 Chalfant on cancer of the uterus, 105

 Chart showing mortality of cancer, 87

 Chewing, importance of, in cancer, 164

 Chimney sweeper’s cancer, 53

 Chocolate harmful in cancer, 157

 Cities, cancer mortality in, 79

 Civilization, and cancer, 83
   cancer a disease of, 57, 72, 83

 Climate, relation of, to cancer, 58

 Clinic, medical, for cancer, 153

 Clinical and statistical studies, results of, 254

 Codeia, harm from, in cancer, 136

 Coe, H. C., on breast cancer, 98

 Coffee harmful in cancer, 157

 Comparative death rates of cancer and tuberculosis, 87, 241

 Conception of cancer hitherto wrong, 240

 Conclusions, 139, 269

 Confidence of patient to be secured, 170

 Constipation very common in cancer, 173

 Contagion of cancer, 21

 Cure of cancer, time of, 124

 Currier on cancer of the uterus, 103

 Cutaneous epithelioma, excluded, 94, 192


 Danger from excising specimens for diagnosis, 123
   from nitrate of silver in epithelioma, 193
   from thyroid extract in cancer, 212, 269
   of imperfected medical treatment, 270
   of spreading cancer, 122

 Death rate of cancer and tuberculosis compared, 87, 241, 259

 Deaths from cancer in New York City, 80

 Deficiency of urine in cancer, 146, 173, 218, 221

 Definition of cancer, 20, 47

 Denmark, cancer mortality in, 85

 Diabetes, relation of, to cancer, 147

 Diet and cancer, 55
   for cancer patients and prophylaxis, 157
   relation of, to cancer, 61

 Dietary card for cancer patients, 154

 Dietetic and medical treatment of cancer, 144
     duration of, 151
     results from, 188
   in sarcoma, 231

 Difficulty in carrying out medical treatment, 114, 152, 186

 Directions for cancer patients, 155

 Duration of dietary and medical treatment, 151
   of observation affecting cancer statistics, 92


 Educational propaganda increasing cancer mortality, 78, 88, 242

 “Embryonic rests” in cancer, 20

 End results of cancer cases, 108, 112

 England, increase of cancer in, with increased meat eating, 69

 England and Wales, cancer mortality in, 83

 Engleman on cancer of the uterus, 104

 Epithelioma, 192
   of the skin,
     excluded from present study, 192
     statistics of, 94
   or carcinoma, 194
     warning against use of nitrate of silver in, 193

 Error as to non-increase of cancer mortality, 74

 Erythrocytes in cancer, 134, 137, 219

 Exact diet for cancer, 157

 Exercise, relation of, to cancer, 56


 Females, relative frequency of cancer in, 49, 50

 Fletcherizing, importance of, in cancer, 164

 Food, relation of, to cancer, 60, 149, 152

 France, cancer mortality in, 85

 Fredrick on cancer of the uterus, 103

 Frequency of cancer in males and females, 49

 Friedenwald on cancer of the stomach, 106


 Gall bladder, cancer of, 106

 German Empire, cancer mortality in, 85

 Good health and cancer, 35


 Handley permeation theory, 126

 Hartwell on breast cancer, 100

 Hemoglobin in cancer, 134, 219
   in sarcoma, 235

 Henrotin on cancer of the uterus, 103

 Heredity and cancer, 21

 Hertzler on cancer of the lip, 95

 Heurtaux on breast cancer, 99

 Hildebrand on breast cancer, 97, 101

 Hoffman on mortality from cancer throughout the world, 76
   on real increase of cancer, 86

 Holland, cancer mortality in, 85

 Hormone of cancerous tissue, 133

 Hungary, cancer mortality in, 85


 Imperfect medical treatment, danger of, 270

 Importance of plasma of blood, 132
   of proper mastication in cancer, 164

 Increase of cancer in England, 68
   in cancer mortality, 74
     in the United States, 77
     throughout world, 76

 Inoperable cancer, 113
   benefited by medical treatment, 209, 217

 Intestinal elimination, faulty in cancer, 43, 173
   relation of, to cancer, 43

 Ireland, cancer mortality in, 85

 Iron, value of, in cancer, 182

 Italy, cancer mortality in, 85
   meat eating and cancer in, 71


 Kentucky, cancer mortality in, 81

 King and Newsholme, 75

 Klein on cancer of the uterus, 103


 Leucocytes in cancer, 134, 219, 235

 Levin on breast cancer, 98

 Limit of time of cure of cancer, 125

 Lip, cancer of, statistics, 95

 Liver, cancer of, 129

 Locality, relation of, to cancer, 58

 Lubhardy on breast cancer, 97

 Lungs, cancer of, 130

 Lymphatic system and cancer, 128

 Lymphocytes in cancer, 135


 Maine, cancer mortality in, 79, 81

 Males, relative frequency of cancer in, 49, 50

 Malignant disease, personal statistics of, 191

 Massachusetts, cancer mortality in, 79

 Masticating, importance of, in cancer, 164

 Mayo on cancer of the breast, 97
   on cancer of the rectum, 106
   on cancer of the stomach, 105, 106

 Meat eating and cancer, 69, 149

 Medical and dietetic treatment, of cancer, 144
     results from, 188, 200‒237
   of sarcoma, 231

 Medical clinic for cancer, 153

 Medicinal treatment of cancer, 169, 175
     imperfect, danger of, 270
     patience and perseverance needed in, 170
   in inoperable cancer, 209, 217
   in recurrent cancer, 209, 211, 214

 Menu for treatment and prophylaxis of cancer, 157

 Metabolism and cancer, 34, 62

 Metastases, 126
   by inoculation, 127
   mode of occurrence of, 126

 Meyer, Willy, on breast cancer, 100

 Mode of life and cancer, 60

 Modes of development of recurrent cancer, 121

 Montana, cancer mortality in, 81

 Morphia, harm from, in cancer, 136

 Morphine less often needed under dietetic and medical treatment, 174

 Mortality from cancer, 74
   about 90 per cent, 143
   chart of, 87
   in cities, 79
   in different States, 79
   increased since educational propaganda, 78, 88, 242

 Mouth, cancer of, 95

 Mundé on cancer of the uterus, 104

 Murphy on end result of operations on breast cancer, 97


 Negative results of cancer laboratory research, 248

 New Hampshire, cancer mortality in, 79

 New York Board of Health and cancer diagnosis, 123

 New York City, cancer death rate in, 80

 New Zealand, meat eating and cancer in, 69

 Nitrate of silver, warning against, in epithelioma, 193

 Nitrogenous matter, relation of, to cancer, 37, 150
   metabolism and cancer, 65
   partition, imperfect, in cancer, 37, 42

 Norway, cancer mortality in, 82, 85

 Nuts, protein content of, 72


 Obesity, cancer with, 33, 55, 97

 Occupation, and cancer, 51

 Optimism of physician necessary, 170

 Origin of cancer, 119, 147

 Oxyproteic acid, relation of, to cancer, 42


 Paget’s disease, 97

 Parasites and cancer, 21

 Patience and perseverance necessary in medical treatment of cancer, 170

 Permanent cure of breast cancer, 97

 Permeation theory of Handley, 126

 Perseverance necessary in medical treatment of cancer, 170

 Personal carcinoma cases, 196
   sarcoma cases, 196

 Phosphorus, value of, in cancer, 183

 Plasma of blood, importance of, 132

 Polak on cancer of the uterus, 105

 Polk on cancer of the uterus, 104

 Polynuclears, activity of, in cancer, 137

 Positive results of cancer laboratory research, 250

 Potassium, value of, in cancer, 138

 Precancerous lesions, 94

 Primary cancer removed by medical treatment, 200‒208

 Problem, cancer, not solved by greater surgical activity, 143, 242
   the real, 239

 Product of systemic changes, cancer tissue a, 142, 244

 Propaganda, educational, increasing cancer mortality, 88, 242

 Prophylaxis of cancer, 144, 167

 Protein and cancer, 37, 64
   content of certain vegetables and nuts, 72


 Quack claims of cure of cancer, 118


 Race, relation of, to cancer, 56

 Real cancer problem, 149, 239

 Reasons for adherence to surgical treatment of cancer, 140
   for inoperability of cancer, 116

 Rectum, cancer of, 106

 Recurrence of cancer, time of, 124

 Recurrent cancer, 119
   and medical treatment, 208
   benefited by medical treatment, 209, 211, 214
   of rectum, 107

 Red blood cells in cancer, 134, 137, 219
   in sarcoma, 235

 Reinecke on cancer of the uterus, 103

 Research, cancer, negative results of, 248
   positive results of, 250

 Results of clinical and statistical studies, 254
   of dietary and medical treatment, 188, 200‒237

 Rheumatism and cancer, 33

 Rice, relation of, to cancer, 168

 Ross, Forbes, on cancer, 136
   on potassium in cancer, 176, 179


 Salivary secretion, acid, in cancer, 44, 146, 164, 199, 213, 221

 Sarcoma, and medical treatment, 231

 Sarcoma cases, personal, 196, 230
   cured by dietary and medical treatment, 189, 236

 Segond on cancer of the uterus, 104

 Sex, relation of, to frequency of cancer, 49

 Skin, cancer of the, 130
   excluded from the present study, 192
   statistics of, 94

 Smith, Lapthorne, on cancer of the uterus, 104

 Solids, urinary, in cancer, 39, 172

 Stage of disease affecting cancer statistics, 90

 Statistical and clinical studies, results of, 254

 Statistics of cancer, affected by duration of observation, 92
   affected by stage of disease, 92
   surgical, 74

 Statistics, elements affecting, 89
   personal, of malignant disease, 191, 196

 Stomach, cancer of, 105
   frequency of, 50
   mortality of, 82, 106

 Stools, importance of inspecting, 184

 Sulphur partition, imperfect, in cancer, 43

 Summary, 239

 Surgery in cancer, blindness as to end results
 of, 139, 240, 243

 Surgical activity, greater, not the solution of cancer problem, 242

 Surgical statistics of cancer, 74

 Systemic changes, causal relationship of, to cancer, 142, 244


 Taste, gratification of, 63

 Thyroid extract, danger from, in cancer, 212, 269

 Time of recurrence of cancer, 124

 Tongue, cancer of the, 95

 Touching up epithelioma with nitrate of silver dangerous, 193

 Trauma of lymphatics, increasing cancer, 45

 Traumatism and cancer, 21

 Treatment of cancer, dietetic and medical, 144

 Tuberculosis and cancer, comparative death rates of, 87, 241, 259

 Tuberculosis, decline of mortality of, 87
   lessons to be learned from, 241

 Tuttle on cancer of rectum, 106


 United States, cancer statistics in, 77, 87

 United States, meat eating and cancer in, 69

 Uric acid and cancer, 37, 201

 Urinary acidity in cancer, 41

 Urinary solids deficient in cancer, 39, 172

 Urine, in cancer, 37
     deficient, 146, 173, 218, 221
   volumetric analysis of, guiding treatment, 172

 Utah, cancer mortality in, 79

 Uterus, cancer of the, 102
   cured by medical treatment, 222, 228
   frequency of, 49
   mortality in, 82
   vegetarian diet in, 224, 228


 Van de Warker on cancer of the uterus, 104

 Variety of medical treatment necessary, 151

 Vegetable soup, how made, 162, 165

 Vegetables, protein content of, 72

 Vegetarian diet, arresting inoculated cancer, 253
   for cancer, 153
   in cancer of the uterus, 224, 228

 Vegetarians and cancer, 71

 Vermont, cancer mortality in, 79, 81

 Vitamines and cancer, 165

 Volumetric analysis of the urine, 172


 Warning as to nitrate of silver in epithelioma, 193

 Waste in preparation of certain foods, 165

 Water, how taken in cancer, 161

 Weight of cancer patients, 219, 226, 235

 Wertheim on cancer of the uterus, 102

 White blood cells in cancer, 134, 219
   in sarcoma, 235

 World statistics of cancer, 76

 Wrong conception of cancer, 240


 X-ray causing cancer, 52

-----

Footnote 1:

  “Cancer, Its Cause and Treatment,” Hoeber, 1915.

Footnote 2:

  This address, which has been delivered before several medical
  societies, is added as giving a summary of the subject elaborated in
  the first volume and this one. It presents the argument more concisely
  and definitely than occurs in any single lecture, and may thus aid in
  properly understanding the whole matter.

Footnote 3:

  This chart appears opposite page 87.

Footnote 4:

  Bulkley: _New York State Medical Journal_, 1916.

Footnote 5:

  Bulkley: “Cancer, Its Cause and Treatment,” Hoeber, 1915.

Footnote 6:

  Bulkley: “Cancer in Relation to Body Elimination,” _New York Med.
  Jour._, July 3, 1915.

Footnote 7:

  Ross: “Cancer, Its Genesis and Treatment.” London, 1912, p. 88.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Retained anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as
      printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANCER: ITS CAUSE AND TREATMENT, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.